
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74676 ***






[Illustration: MOZAMBIQUE.

Lyons Mc. Leod, del. T. Picken, lith.

London, Published by Hurst & Blackett, 1860.

Day & Son, Lithrs. to the Queen.]




                        TRAVELS IN EASTERN AFRICA;
                                   WITH
                     THE NARRATIVE OF A RESIDENCE IN
                               MOZAMBIQUE.

                                    BY
                      LYONS MCLEOD, ESQ., F.R.G.S.,
        HONORARY FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES
               AND OF THE METEOROLOGICAL SOCIETY, MAURITIUS
                    LATE H.B.M. CONSUL AT MOZAMBIQUE.

        [Illustration: GRAVES OF BRITISH OFFICERS AT MOZAMBIQUE.]

      “Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.”—_Psalm
                             LXVIII. v. 31._

                             IN TWO VOLUMES.
                                 VOL. II.

                                 LONDON:
                     HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,
                       SUCCESSORS TO HENRY COLBURN,
                      13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
                                  1860.

                 _The right of Translation is reserved._




CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.


                               CHAPTER I.

    Governor-General of Mozambique Superseded for Slave-dealing,
    and Arrival of His Successor—Trick of Slave-dealers to cause
    an Early Misunderstanding between the New Governor-General
    and the British Consul—Polite Attentions of the New
    Governor-General—Decisive Measure adopted for the Suppression
    of the Slave-Trade—The Fort signalizes to a Slaver in the
    Offing—Seizure of the “Charles et Georges”—Arrival of H.M.
    Frigate “Castor,” and desertion by her of the British
    Consul—Combination of Slave-dealers to drive the British Consul
    from the Port                                                        1

                               CHAPTER II.

    The Portuguese Merchant and the Governor-General—Arbitrary
    Measures adopted towards the Banyans—The Piratical seizure of
    the “Ari-passa”—Measures adopted for her Restoration—Comparison
    between Wellington’s Soldiers and Mozambique Soldiers—The
    “Ari-passa” is restored—Seizure of the British cutter “Herald”      34

                              CHAPTER III.

    Escape of British Consul and Party from the Attack of the
    Natives—Supplies Cut Off—Governor-General Protects the
    Consul—Insolence of the Portuguese Guard—The Crew of the Cutter
    “Herald” Arrive—The Consul’s Position Improved—Insolence of the
    Portuguese Coxswain Exposed—The Governor-General furnishes the
    Consul with a Guard—The Slave-dealers Disband the Mozambique
    Police, and the Consul is without a Guard—Fever Attacks the
    Inmates of the Consul’s House—The Portuguese Doctors Refuse to
    Render any Assistance—Mr. Duncan Dies—Hurricane at Mozambique       83

                               CHAPTER IV.

    The Negro José—Negro Bread—The Promised Sail of Hope—The
    Commander of H. M. Cruiser—The Consul Supplied with a Guard
    by H. M. Brig—Jealousy of Slave-dealers—Governor-General
    Furnishes a Guard—Consul Renews his Correspondence on the
    Slave-trade—House Attacked and Wife Wounded—Governor-General
    Declares his Inability to Protect the British Consul—Consul
    Embarks on board H. M. S. “Lyra”—Outrage on the Grave of a
    British Subject                                                    122

                               CHAPTER V.

    Mauritius—The Introduction of Labour from India—Machinery
    and Guano—Population—Revenue Exceeds the Expenditure
    Considerably—Immigration Crimps—Coloured Ball—The Key to
    India—The Governor of Réunion offers to Garrison “the Isle
    of France”—Port Louis—Two Bishops—Bad Hôtels-“Dieu et Mon
    Droit”—“Trumpeters before Travellers”—“There, you Poor
    Devil!”—The Colonel’s Wedding-day—British Barque “Sutton” Opens
    a New Description of Slave-Trade—The Gallant Affair of the
    “Sarah Sands”                                                      144

                               CHAPTER VI.

    France and Madagascar—Radama, Sovereign of the whole
    Island—Mayotte, the French Gibraltar—Nossi-bé and Hell
    Town—Holy Fathers in St. Augustine Bay—Malagasy Children
    taken to Réunion and educated by the Jesuits—Recent Attempt
    of the French to Revolutionize Madagascar—M. Lambert—Madam
    Ida Pfeiffer—Père Jean—Laborde—The Plot thickens—The Queen
    discovers all—The Conspirators banished from the Island—Death
    of Ida Pfeiffer—Products—Means proposed for securing the
    Independence of Madagascar                                         180

                              CHAPTER VII.

    The Vale Estate—Departure from Mauritius—Réunion—Ex-mayor of
    St. Denis—History of Seychelles—Equable Temperature—Magnificent
    Harbour of Refuge in the Centre of the Indian Ocean—Actors
    in the Reign of Terror—Products—Sperm Whale—Turtle—Coco de
    Mer—Exports                                                        207

                              CHAPTER VIII.

    Arrival at Aden—Arabia the Ancient Nursery of Commerce—How Aden
    became a British Possession—Description of the Peninsula, Town,
    Tanks, &c—Departure from Aden—Perim—Sight the Comet—Crossing
    the Desert—Arrival in England.                                     231

                               CHAPTER IX.

    On the Resources of Eastern Africa                                 258

    APPENDIX A                                                         283
        ”    B                                                         304
        ”    C                                                         321




TRAVELS IN EASTERN AFRICA.




CHAPTER I.

    Governor-general of Mozambique Superseded for Slave-dealing,
    and Arrival of His Successor—Trick of Slave-dealers to cause
    an Early Misunderstanding between the New Governor-general
    and the British Consul—Polite Attentions of the New
    Governor-general—Decisive Measure adopted for the Suppression
    of the Slave-Trade—The Fort signalizes to a Slaver in the
    Offing—Seizure of the “Charles et Georges”—Arrival of H.M.
    Frigate “Castor,” and desertion by her of the British
    Consul—Combination of Slave-dealers to drive the British Consul
    from the Port.


On the afternoon of the 22nd September, 1857, the city of Mozambique
was in a great state of excitement, for in the offing was the frigate
“Don Ferdinand,” having on board the new Governor-general, sent by the
government of Portugal to supersede Vasco Guedes de Carvalho e Menezes,
for carrying on the slave-trade in the province of Mozambique.

Slowly the old frigate threaded her way into the harbour, and took up a
berth, opposite the town, between Fort San Sebastian and the Palace of
the Governor-general.

On the next day invitations were issued for the principal personages
at Mozambique to attend the ceremony of the installation of the new
Governor-general, on the following Saturday, the 29th, at eleven o’clock.

An invitation was sent to the British consul as a matter of course, but
it was for Saturday the 30th, at half-past eleven o’clock. The object
of wording his invitation in this manner was that it was hoped he would
attend on the 30th instead of on the 29th, by which he would be “a day
after the fair,” and by this means a misunderstanding might be at once
created between the new Governor-general and the British consul. The
consul found that he was evidently asked for the wrong day, but hoping
that this might be a mistake, he proceeded to the palace at a few
minutes before half-past eleven, as invited.

On his arrival, he found that the ceremony of presentation to his
Excellency was almost finished; and, while elbowing his way through
the reception-rooms of the palace, crowded with brilliant uniforms,
the Jesuit secretary of Vasco Guedes met him, and informed him that he
“regretted exceedingly that the British consul had arrived too late to
be presented to the new Governor-general.” The British consul quietly
replied by pulling the letter of invitation out of his pocket, and
pointing out that by reading it in one way, he was just five minutes and
a quarter before the time invited; and reading it another way, he was at
the palace twenty-four hours, five minutes, and one quarter before the
hour indicated in the letter. The secretary smiled, apologized, wished to
explain, and, in fact, do anything to cause delay until the presentation
was over. But the British consul at once requested him to present him
to the new Governor-general; when this nephew of a cardinal positively
declined, alleging, as an excuse, that it was too late. Hereupon the
British consul produced his commission, and, politely bowing to the
cardinal’s nephew, reminded him that the Exequatur of the King of
Portugal, &c., gave access at all times to the Governor-general of
Mozambique. The secretary smiled, showing all his white teeth, and bowed
low in acknowledgment of his defeat. The consul passed on, and at last,
just before the ceremony was over, reached the astonished Vasco Guedes,
to whom, after paying the usual compliments of the day, he preferred
a request that he would at once present him to his successor, Colonel
Almeida, who was standing on his left hand.

The new Governor-general shook hands with the British consul, and
requested him to take his proper place, on his left hand, and then
inquired if he had brought over with him, from the mainland, a machilla,
for the purpose of attending the ceremony, which was to take place in the
principal church. A machilla, I ought to explain, is a sort of cot, or
swinging sofa, with an awning over it, in which persons are carried by
four slaves, bearing on their shoulders the large bamboo pole to which it
is attached.

Finding that the British consul had no machilla with him, and would,
consequently, have to walk in the sun, Colonel Almeida asked Vasco Guedes
if a machilla could not be procured for the consul; to which the latter
replying in the negative, his Excellency called a young aide-de-camp, a
nephew of the Sa de Bandeira, and asked him to procure a machilla; but
this the polite young aide-de-camp found impossible, for every one had
made up his mind to make the British consul walk.

The ceremony being ended, and no machilla making its appearance for my
use, the new Governor-general said, “Now, gentlemen, we will repair to
the church; but, as Mozambique cannot provide a machilla for the use of
the British consul, we must all accompany that gentleman on foot.”

I have been particular in mentioning the above, to show the animosity of
the slave-dealers towards myself; and how it was at once perceived by the
new Governor-general.

On the way to the church, Colonel Almeida insisted that I should take
my place with himself and Vasco Guedes, under the large purple velvet
umbrella, which, on state occasions, is held over the Governor-general of
the province.

After the religious ceremony in the church was over, I was requested to
repair to the palace, with the officers of H.M.S.V. “Geyser,” who were
present at the ceremony, and there to await the return of the procession
from Fort San Sebastian, to which the new Governor-general had to repair
for the purpose of receiving the keys of the fort.

On his Excellency’s return, we were again presented, and congratulated
him on his taking possession of the government of the province. In
the evening there was a ball, where all the “beauty and fashion” of
Mozambique attended.

On the following Monday I called the attention of the new
Governor-general to some serious charges preferred by me against the
Governor of Ibo, in being openly engaged in the slave-trade.

Vasco Guedes had told me that he could not supersede the Governor of
Ibo for these practices, as he was appointed directly by the King, but
Colonel Almeida made short work of it, by appointing another governor to
Ibo, and requesting me to obtain a passage for him in H.M.S.V. “Geyser.”

This request I was not able to comply with, as an urgent order had
arrived from the Cape of Good Hope, recalling the “Geyser.” At that time
I had only just heard of the Indian mutiny. I expected that Sir George
Grey would send every regiment and vessel on to India, and that he would
be anxiously looking out for the “Geyser.” Although I saw hot work for
the new Governor-general and myself, I hurried the “Geyser” to the Cape,
where, I hoped, she would be useful to my country.

On the arrival of the new Governor at Ibo, he found a vessel under French
colours lying there waiting for slaves, which his predecessor was about
to supply. This vessel, called the “Marie et Caroline,” the new Governor,
Lieutenant J. Romeiro, sent down to Mozambique; and there being a French
Delegate on board, who stated that she had sailed from Réunion for the
purpose of embarking free labourers from the east coast of Africa, he was
informed by the Governor-general of Mozambique that this traffic in human
beings was forbidden, and had to enter into a bond that he would not
endeavour to carry on this species of slave-trade within the precincts of
the province of Mozambique. The “Marie et Caroline” was then released;
and another vessel, named the “Maria Stella,” under the French flag,
being sent down from Ibo to Mozambique, was treated in the same manner.

The new Governor-general had thus shown himself determined to put an end
to the slave-trade, and to carry out faithfully the treaties entered into
by Portugal and Great Britain, for the suppression of the slave-trade in
these seas.

In the middle of November I had received intelligence that slaves were
to be shipped close to Mozambique, and had communicated this fact to the
Governor-general, during an interview which I had with his Excellency.

On the evenings of the 17th, 18th, and 19th of November, I observed from
my house that signals were being made from Cabaçeira Point, by means of
fires, to some sail in the offing. On the last of those evenings the
Fort San Sebastian was communicating with the vessel in the offing by
means of lights; and I afterwards found that for these three days a large
three-masted vessel was in sight from the fort. The commandant of the
fort, an old colonel of artillery, I knew to be a notorious slave-dealer,
and when he was telegraphing to the vessel in the offing I felt convinced
that the rumour which I had heard relative to slaves being about to be
shipped in the neighbourhood of the fort was but too true.

On the following day I received an intimation in writing from the city of
Mozambique that a three-masted vessel was lying in Conducia Bay, shipping
slaves; and having, on the 21st November, satisfied myself that two
refractory slaves belonging to my neighbour, Brigadier Candido de Costa
Soares, had been shipped on board a slaver in Conducia Bay, I no longer
hesitated to address the Governor-general on the subject, simply writing
to his Excellency “that I had received intelligence that a three-masted
vessel was at anchor in Conducia Bay; and that there was reason to
suppose that she was shipping a cargo of slaves.”

Now, this vessel was the celebrated “Charles et Georges,” and she was
visible from the fort during the whole time that she was at anchor in
Conducia Bay. Slaves were taken from the city of Mozambique, and put on
board of her, and everyone in Mozambique was aware what trade she was
engaged in.

No one moved in the matter until I addressed an official intimation to
the Governor-general, and it is quite certain that if there had been no
British consul at Mozambique she would never have been seized.

As soon as the Governor-general received my despatch, he sent a force
overland, past my house, to Conducia Bay; and one of the _obliging_
merchants of Mozambique offered his Excellency the use of the “Enigma”
schooner to take the troops to Conducia Bay to seize the slaver. The
troops embarked on board the “Enigma” at one o’clock in the afternoon,
and that vessel did not raise her anchor until five in the evening. She
dropped her anchor again in about an hour’s time, and remained in harbour
until the next morning.

When the “Enigma” reached Conducia Bay, the slaver was gone; of course
she was warned off, and the “Enigma” had been offered simply to detain
the soldiers until the slaver escaped.

The Governor-general refitted the “Zambesi” schooner, already well known
to the reader, and she was sent to sea in three days’ time.

The “Charles et Georges” had shipped some portion of her slaves, and as
she left four thousand dollars on shore with the Portuguese official, the
Sheik at Matabane, for the purchase of more slaves, it was natural that
she should return.

Accordingly, while cruising off the coast, the “Zambesi” observed a
strange three-masted vessel at anchor in Conducia Bay, and, bearing down
on the stranger, boarded her on the 29th of November.

She was conveyed to Mozambique, and handed over to the judge, who
condemned her, as he found that there were four thousand dollars on
board of her, the handling of which he would of course have.

A small French war schooner was sent from Réunion to demand her
restoration. The judge immediately represented that the slave barque
“Charles et Georges” was improperly condemned, and advised the
Governor-general to restore her.

The reason for the head of the law reconsidering his decision was that
he was told he might retain the four thousand dollars found on board the
“Charles et Georges,” and that one thousand more would be added if the
vessel was restored.

The Governor-general was not to be trifled with in this manner, and
decided that, as the judge had condemned her, he would send the “Charles
et Georges” to Lisbon.

So far so good. The slave-trade was being effectually suppressed, as the
British consul urged the Governor-general of Mozambique to do his duty.
But another actor appeared on the scene, and soon altered the position of
H.M. Consul at Mozambique.

On the 3rd of December H.M. frigate “Castor” called at Mozambique. The
captain of that vessel, Henry Lyster, Esq., was quite astonished at the
energy and determination displayed by the Governor-general of Mozambique,
acting under the advice of the British consul. The day after his arrival
he called upon the latter functionary, and remained with him about ten
minutes.

In this short space of time H.M. Consul informed Captain Lyster, R.N.,
that on the night the “Charles et Georges” anchored in Mozambique
harbour, the slaves belonging to the slave-dealers stoned the band of
the Governor-general, while playing before the palace, and that he
was obliged to flog a number of the slaves of the town, to prevent a
repetition of this offence; that the slave-dealers, baffled in their
attack on the Governor-general, twice attacked the consul’s house,
through the medium of their slaves, whom they sent to stone the consul
in his house; that he was served with a notice to quit the house he was
then residing in, and that there was not one in the town which he could
get to live in; that some short time previous, having gone to look at a
house in the country, which he was told was to let, he was attacked by
infuriated natives, who had been urged to this act by the slave-dealers,
and that he escaped with his party by having been shown a road which led
him from the natives to his own house.

He further showed Captain Henry Lyster, R.N., that he was without
servants—all the slaves, with the exception of a child, which would not
leave, having been taken from the house. He claimed his protection, and
also asked him for a small boat by which he could communicate with the
Governor-general.

To which Captain Lyster replied that he must immediately return to the
Cape of Good Hope, and apprize the admiral of the serious state of
affairs at Mozambique; and requested the consul to close his despatches,
as his departure was immediate. He promised to send over in the evening
for the consul’s despatches, if they did not reach him; and hurried out
of the consul’s house, stating that he had to make arrangements for
watering the ship at once.

The next morning at daylight, the “Castor” was observed, under her
topsails, standing out to sea. It was imagined that H.M. frigate had
gone in chase of some strange sail in the offing, but as day passed after
day, the fearful and humiliating truth dawned on the inmates of the
British consulate, that they had been abandoned to their fate.

The captain of H.M. frigate “Castor” left Mozambique without the
consul’s despatches, either for the admiral at the Cape, or the British
government. On the arrival of the “Castor” in England, Captain Lyster,
R.N., was made superintendent of a naval dock-yard. Comment is needless,
but sometimes truth is stranger than fiction.

Soon after the desertion of the British consul and the Governor-general
of Mozambique by H.M. frigate “Castor,” a marked change took place in the
conduct of the Governor-general of Mozambique; for he anticipated that
the British government would not support Portugal in the struggle which
he saw that weak power would have with France. Those who have studied
this subject may pronounce their own opinion, but one thing is certain,
that to the base desertion of the British consul at that critical period
may be traced the subsequent insolence of the slave-dealers, the
increase of the slave-trade, and the sufferings of H.M. Consul and family.

As long as Vasco Guedes remained at Mozambique, the slave-trade party
felt that they had nothing to fear; but now that Colonel Almeida had
arrived, and had published the Portarias of the King of Portugal,
forbidding the French Free Labour Emigration, and his own declaration
that it was his determination to persecute that traffic wherever he might
find it in the province of Mozambique, the slave-dealers found that the
British Consul and the Governor-general united were too much for them;
they therefore determined to do all in their power to drive the former
out of the colony, believing that afterwards they would be able to do as
they pleased with the new Governor-general.

Three days after the sailing of H.M.S.V. “Geyser,” by which vessel
Mr. Soares believed I had sent an application to England to have
him appointed H.M. Vice-Consul at Mozambique, (but which I did not
forward in consequence of learning to what extent he was engaged in
the slave-trade, and by his own admission to me that he had been the
principal person in establishing the French Free Labour Scheme at
Mozambique):—Mr. Soares sent me a written intimation that he would
require both his houses, the one on the island in twenty-four hours, and
that on the mainland in a month or forty days. Until I received this
intimation, I had not the slightest knowledge of anything of this sort
which was going on, and, indeed, looked forward daily to getting into the
house on the island.

I immediately called Mr. Soares to an account for treating me in this
manner. His reply was, “They say, Mr. M’Leod, that I give you all the
information about the slave-trade, and that I must leave the place, or
that you must.” I asked him who _they_ were, but he would not answer my
question.

He told me that his father said that he must put me out of his house,
to clear himself of the charge that had been brought against him by the
Mozambique people. I asked him to tell me—if I was so foolish as to give
up to him a house which I had taken for twelve months—where I could find
another house vacant? He told me that there was not one in Mozambique;
and that, if there was, the people had determined among themselves not to
let me even have a room for an office, much less a house to live in.

I reminded him that he was differently treated at the Cape of Good Hope;
he begged me, with tears in his eyes, not again to allude to what he
could never forget; and stated that what he was doing he was compelled to
do, and that if he left Mozambique it would be much worse for me.

Finding that he was quite insensible to reason, I gave him to understand
that since, under numerous pretexts, he had prevented my taking absolute
possession of that portion of the house on the island which was let to
me, and that he was now in possession of it, why, I must submit to be
deprived of it; but that, with regard to the house on the mainland, I
intended to remain in it until the time agreed upon was completed, or
until such time as I obtained another house. He got into a great rage,
and told me that “he would remove all the slaves, and that I would be
unable to live in the house then.” To which I replied “that then he
would break his agreement with me.” This caused him to answer that he
“did not care what he did to get me out of the house, for that his father
said I must leave the place.”

From that day the slaves were gradually removed, until there was only one
little child, called Azinte, left, who refused to leave.

Azinte was about eight years of age; she was a melancholy child, with
intelligence far above her years. Her face was good, and there was a
sweet resigned smile upon it, which interested the commonest observer.

She came especially under my wife’s notice in the following manner:—

The grown up slaves, while employed at their work, left one of the little
ones always to watch their meal while it was cooking, and to keep a good
fire under the pot.

On one of these occasions Azinte was left guardian; and, whether it was
the pangs of hunger, or the curiosity inherent to her sex, and inherited
from our common mother, Eve, which urged her, I know not, but she
uncovered the pot to look at its contents, and, like many children of an
older growth and a fairer skin, the temptation was too much for her, and
she was caught in the act of helping herself to the old folks’ dinner.
To the Mozambique negro mercy is never shown; and therefore, in the hour
of his might, we cannot expect him to be merciful. Nay, cruelty for
successive ages has made him cruel. Azinte’s little hand was seized by a
powerful grasp, and held upon the burning faggots.

For three days and three nights she endured excruciating torments. Rosa,
my wife’s maid, inquiring for her little favourite, found her hid away
in an outhouse, neglected by all her companions, who would not even take
her a drink of water. Rosa took the suffering child to her mistress.
The little hand was in a frightful state; but by careful dressing and
constant attention it was saved. The little Azinte was ever afterwards
kept in the house. She would never point out the monster who had seared
her hand. The little negress was very grateful, and loved my wife dearly.
Many attempts were made to steal the child from us, but she escaped them
all. At last, the hour of parting came; I asked Mr. Soares to give the
child her freedom. He told me to buy it, and to name my own price. He
would have sold me the child for one shilling; but not even to liberate
could I buy a slave. Poor Azinte, you were sacrificed to a stern sense
of duty. Here was a little being humanized, if not civilized; those who
had raised her to that state had no control over her. She was a chattel
belonging to a Portuguese of Mozambique descent, and was to be used as
such. We often think what may be her fate!

When the slaves were removed from Mr. Soares’ house, in the hope of
driving us away, I used every endeavour to hire some from persons in the
city of Mozambique. A German merchant would have procured me the services
of some, but as he could not hold slaves more than myself, he was
dependent on the will of the Mozambique people, who hired their slaves to
him on the express condition that he would not lend them to the British
consul. On all sides, I was now beset with offers of slaves, cheap slaves
to sell.

In this dilemma, I applied to the Governor-general for the loan of
government slaves. At first he said he would, of course, give me what I
required; but afterwards, he stated that he found it was impossible to
supply me with a crew for my boat, or even one government slave.

Anticipating that things might come to this, when the Mozambique people
found that what I did on my arrival to suppress the slave-trade, I
continued during my sojourn among them, I had written to a Parsee house
at Bombay to send me a suitable number of servants. Since my arrival in
England, I have received a letter from the Parsee merchant, containing
the envelope of my letter from Mozambique, to show me by the post-mark
the date of its arrival at Bombay, and to prove that my order not being
executed was no fault of his. The simple fact is that my letter was
detained at Mozambique.

Being without any assistance in the house, if I except a sick Portuguese
soldier, who used to oblige us occasionally by attending on table, I
was obliged to face the work manfully. The Portuguese refused to light
the fire, alleging that it was negroes’ work, and so the British consul
had to do it. For months, I drew water from the well and cut up the
fire-wood. The Portuguese said his arms were not strong enough to draw
water from the well, and that cutting up fire-wood made his back ache;
so, of course, this necessary work devolved upon me.

But there were some things I could not do—for example, cook our meals;
this devolved on my wife and Rosa. Those who have a fancy to know what
this was like must get some mangrove-wood, the arsenical fumes from
which, after suffocating and blinding them, will render them unfit to eat
anything for that day. Hard-earned was the morsel that was cooked for
dinner; but the day came when we had no wood and no food, and God, in his
mercy, sent our countrymen, who were the survivors of the crew of the
unfortunate “Herald,” to save us.

At Mozambique, no one would wash our clothes; and for months this
necessary work was performed by my wife and poor weak Rosa, with no
assistance but the little Azinte, who, poor child, learned in the course
of time to lay the clothes upon the grass. This necessary labour had to
be performed by two delicate Englishwomen, with the thermometer ranging
from 80° to 96° in the shade, and yet they are both alive at this moment.

All this had to be endured; we were in the hands of the Philistines, and
we had to do battle with them; ours was the battle of patient endurance.

The Portuguese wished to degrade us in the eyes of the negroes; to show
them what an inferior race the English were; that they could not keep one
slave, whilst the Portuguese had hundreds.

After the severe toil of the day, we were all glad when night came, and
thankful that health and strength were granted to us.

Such was the state of affairs in my house, when my German friend offered
me a passage in one of the vessels belonging to his firm, which was then
in port, and proceeding to Zanzibar.

Although resolved to remain at Mozambique, and maintain my post, despite
all persecution, I reasoned with myself on the sinfulness of sacrificing
the lives of two other persons, and, therefore, determined to avail
myself of this opportunity of sending my wife and her maid to Zanzibar,
to await my arrival there; as, in that case, I would have been able
to find accommodation for myself on board some vessel or dhow in the
harbour, until such time as the hour of deliverance arrived, by the
presence of one of Her Majesty’s ships.

On proposing to my wife a visit to Zanzibar, her countenance revealed
with what joy she hailed any change from that continued toil under which
herself and her maid were rapidly failing. But, instantly divining that
it was my intention to remain at Mozambique, and maintain my post, while
she and her maid were expected to proceed to Zanzibar, with her eyes
suffused with tears, she claimed, and successfully pleaded, her wife’s
privilege to share her husband’s trials.

Soon afterwards my wife sent for her maid, and told her that there was a
passage provided for her to Zanzibar, where arrangements would be made
for her conveyance to the Cape of Good Hope, where her mother lived. But
that noble girl, Rosa Smith, refused to desert her mistress; and, when
this offer was again made to her, after the desertion of H.M. frigate
“Castor,” she adhered to the same resolution.

From that evening, during our stay at Mozambique, in all our sufferings
and privations, with sickness, hunger, and even death in my house, I
never heard a murmur. Both these Englishwomen felt that they were called
upon to perform a sacred duty. They suffered in a holy cause—that of
the slave—and HE who “tempereth the wind to the shorn lamb” gave them
strength to endure.

The following is an account of an act of brutality towards a domestic
slave which came under my own eye, and the particulars of which I extract
from my journal at Mozambique:—

“On Monday, the 15th of March, 1858, at 8.30 A.M., we were greatly
distressed by screams, which proceeded from some fellow-being in the
compound of the next house, the wall of which was about thirty yards
distant from our own. Mrs. M’Leod was at the time slowly recovering from
the effects of the fever, and the treatment she had received from Dr.
Fonseca, and it may be easier imagined than described, what a serious
effect this affair had on her system. The screams proceeding from that
house were, on this occasion, more alarming than those that were heard
from time to time, daily, when the female overseer was employed in
punishing the slaves under her control. At last, they became so alarming
that we came to the conclusion that the slaves had risen upon Portuguese
Rosa, the overseer, and having succeeded in getting her into one of the
outhouses, they were employed in avenging themselves for the gross and
continued wrongs which they had suffered at her hands.

“Believing that this was the case, and urged by the entreaties of my wife
and her maid to endeavour to save the woman from the fury of the negroes,
I repaired to Mr. Soares’ house, in the court-yard of which the following
revolting scene met my view:—

“Portuguese Rosa was lying on a native bed, or sofa, which was placed
with its head about three feet from the doorway of an outhouse, in which
cocoa-nuts were stored until required for the use of the house.

“This Portuguese woman was reclining at full length on the sofa, her
chin supported by her hand, and contemplating, with evident pleasure,
the disgusting scene of barbarity which was being enacted inside of the
cocoa-nut house. A negro, one of the finest specimens of man I have
ever looked upon, and one that an artist would have wished for a model
of Apollo, was lashed up to a ladder by his hands and legs; two negroes
were castigating him on his posteriors; two spare ones were waiting to
relieve them, and one old negro stood by, who appeared to be a doctor,
witnessing how much the sufferer could bear without being killed. The
poor creature’s posteriors and thighs were covered with blood, and a pool
of blood was around his feet. There lay the Portuguese woman, calmly
enjoying this scene of blood, occasionally instructing the actors where
to strike, when a cry of more thrilling anguish would testify to her
refinement in torment.

“Anxious to put an end to this revolting scene, I asked—nay, I
begged—this fiend in woman’s form to pardon and release the man.

“Instantly her dark eye was lighted up with the frenzy of intense hatred,
and, turning to me, she said, ‘For anything with a white skin, I would
pardon—but for you, THOU CHAMPION OF THE SLAVE!—NEVER!’ Then turning to
the executioners, she yelled, ‘Flog, sons of hell, flog! or else I’ll
pour the boiling oil upon you.’ This drew my attention to a neighbouring
fire, on which stood a pot, which, I afterwards learned, contained
boiling oil. To have remained longer would have only added to the
sufferings of the slave. This was a case of domestic slavery, in which,
of course, I could not interfere. A late Portaria of the King of Portugal
declares that this slavery shall cease in twenty years time; that is to
say, continues it for that period. Subsequently, I heard that this slave
was punished for disobedience of orders. Inquiring further into the
matter, I learned that this noble black had refused to castigate his own
mother. Women of England, and mothers of Portugal, hear me; and when you
hear, speak—so that Don Pedro the Fifth, of Portugal, shall cause slavery
to cease in his African dominions, and leave to his dynasty a name, the
memory of which shall awaken prouder associations than those even of the
Era of Conquest.”

A few days after witnessing the frightful atrocity just related, I had a
letter sent to me from the master of the cruel Portuguese woman, and the
owner of the godlike manly form, with a black skin, whose ignominious
tortures I had witnessed, in which I was called a spy, and sundry other
equally complimentary epithets, for having unfortunately witnessed a
scene revolting to humanity, when I imagined I was bound on an errand
of mercy, in an endeavour to save the life of a fellow-being. Of this
I took no notice; but, from that moment, I felt convinced that my
neighbours’ slaves were more rigorously dealt with than even before. With
a refinement of devilment, during the remainder of my stay at Mozambique,
the Sabbath of the Lord was set aside specially for the punishment of Mr.
Soares’ negroes; and, as that Portuguese gentleman knew that the Consul
of Protestant England performed the service of the Church of England,
every Sunday, at eleven o’clock in the forenoon, that hour was chosen for
the commencement of these harrowing tortures, which were continued until
one P.M., when he imagined that the prayers of the heretic were ended.
Where those cries of anguish ascended to the throne of the Omnipotent,
the song of praise will, assuredly, be heard at no distant period.

The Portuguese, entirely devoted to slavery, have neglected the natives
in religion, as in all other matters; and as the Makuas have not imbibed
Mahometan principles from the Moors or Arabs, who do not here attempt any
proselytism, there is an admirable opening at Mozambique for Protestant
missionaries; but MOLOCH, in the shape of the slave-trade, must first be
done away with, when a noble field for missionary labour will be laid
open.

As a further example of the cruelty which Portuguese women perpetrate on
their slaves, the following barbarity was related to me as having been
inflicted in the city of Mozambique:—

A Mozambique lady, having been clearly convicted of some delinquency,
by the evidence of one of her female slaves, adopted this method of
punishment, which,—even among those who are in the habit of burning their
slaves with red hot iron, pulling out the nails of the fingers and toes
for punishment, and otherwise perpetrating, in that remote region, the
horrors of the Inquisition—is spoken of with disgust. The unhappy girl
was seized and firmly secured; an egg was boiled, and, on being removed
from the pot, was forcibly placed in the mouth of the wretched slave. A
sail-needle was then driven as a skewer through both lips, when the girl
was released, and the lady owner viewed her torments. This she-devil, not
yet satisfied with the punishment inflicted on her fellow-being, ordered
the slave-girl to be struck on both cheeks until the egg was broken, and
the scalding contents went down her throat.

The slave-trade thrives only in the African dominions of the King of
Portugal; and the late Portaria of that monarch at once places His
Majesty foremost among the advocates of slavery. Until slavery is
entirely abolished in the African dominions of Don Pedro the Fifth, the
slave-trade will flourish, while outraged humanity and the suffering
Africans exclaim to that potentate, “_Thou art the man!_”




CHAPTER II

    The Portuguese Merchant and the Governor-general—Arbitrary
    Measures adopted towards the Banyans—The Piratical seizure of
    the “Ari-passa”—Measures adopted for her Restoration—Comparison
    between Wellington’s Soldiers and Mozambique Soldiers—The
    “Ari-passa” is restored—Seizure of the British cutter “Herald.”


There being some misunderstanding as to what portion of the coast between
Cape Delgado and Delagoa Bay has belonged to Portugal, and, as the
British government has never been represented by any agent on that coast
until within the last three years, it naturally devolved upon me, as the
first British functionary employed by Great Britain in the province of
Mozambique, to make myself thoroughly acquainted with the real state of
the question of Portuguese possession in Eastern Africa, on which, in a
great measure, hangs the future commercial development and civilization
of Central Africa; and I now lay before the intelligent reader the result
of my patient and impartial inquiries on the subject.

On referring to the accompanying chart of Eastern Africa, the reader
will observe that the Portuguese territory consists of positions almost
entirely insular—namely, Ibo, Mozambique, Killimane, Sofala, Bazarutto,
Inhambane, Delagoa Bay, and Pemba Bay; at which last named place the
Portuguese have made a settlement within the last year.

On the river Zambesi they also have the towns of Seña and Tete.

Some of these positions—Ibo, Mozambique, and Bazarutto—are beyond
gun-shot distance of the coast, virtually exercising no authority
whatever over the mainland; and, strictly speaking, from my own personal
observation, the Portuguese authority, even nominally, does not extend
five miles above high-water mark, nor more than that distance from any
flag-staff erected by Portugal anywhere on the whole line of coast from
Cape Delgado to Delagoa Bay.

Excepting at the points indicated in the accompanying chart, and already
named, the Portuguese do not, and have never, even for a short period of
time, held even nominal possession of the coast referred to, with the
exception of what is known as the kingdom of Angoxa.

The kingdom of Angoxa, having a sea-board of ninety miles, and reaching
into the interior 180 miles, is reigned over by an independent sultan,
having under him from thirty to forty chiefs. It is rich in produce,
which is fully described in the chapter on the “Resources of Eastern
Africa.”

Soon after my arrival at Mozambique, my attention was called to the
very arbitrary measures which the Portuguese authorities can adopt when
it suits their purpose, showing that it is not want of power, but
want of inclination, which prevents them stopping the slave-trade, and
encouraging legitimate commerce. A merchant at Mozambique had a serious
difference with the Governor-general, the subject of their quarrel being
the French Free Labour Emigration. It appears that the merchant, having a
high character for probity, had been entrusted by the French agents with
the division of the head money, which was allowed to the authorities at
Mozambique for the generous supply of slaves for this traffic.

The merchant acquitted his task to the satisfaction of all parties,
retaining, for himself, a certain portion, to which he was entitled by
agreement, as one of the promoters of this very successful scheme. During
the absence of the merchant from Mozambique the Governor-general had
divided the plunder, and he refused to account for the amount which was
due to the merchant as his share of the transaction.

On the merchant’s return, he became again the person in whom all parties
placed confidence, and he therefore re-imbursed himself from the
Governor-general’s share in the next slave cargo which was supplied to a
French Free Labour Emigration ship.

The Governor-general was furious, while every one applauded the
justice of the merchant. Shortly afterwards, a vessel belonging to
the merchant was about to sail; the Governor-general refused her
permission to leave the harbour, and would assign no reason. The merchant
threatened to sell the vessel to the English consul, much under her
value, and to communicate the whole of the circumstances attending the
transaction, unless the Governor-general allowed his vessel to sail. The
Governor-general was obstinate, but at last relented. During his fit
of obstinacy the uncontrollable rage of the other party caused him to
make the circumstances of the case known to the English consul, who thus
got a deeper insight into the slave-trade as carried on at Mozambique,
and was timely prevented forwarding the application of the honest
Portuguese merchant to the British government for the appointment of H.M.
Vice-Consul at Mozambique, for which he had been strongly recommended
to me, both verbally and in writing, by the officer commanding Her
Majesty’s naval forces at the Cape of Good Hope. It requires a residence
at Mozambique to unmask the slave-dealers there. One casually visiting
the place is hospitably entertained, and those deepest engaged in the
traffic are the loudest in their apparent denunciations of it. Thus our
naval officers have been misled, and made to believe that parties there
were opposed to the slave-trade when they were actually conversing with
the prime movers of the whole scheme.

From the seizure of Mr. Sunley’s brig off Angoxa, and the tacit manner
in which legal trade is carried on between Angoxa and Zanzibar by the
Arabs, under the protection of their immediate dreaded neighbour, the
Imâm of Muskat, it will be seen that a different policy is pursued by
the Mozambique government towards a prince who has taught them to fear
him, and the great English nation, whom they look upon as a good-natured
people, inoculated with a Quixotic idea of improving the moral,
intellectual, and physical condition of a race which they consider
irreclaimable, and so degraded that they treat them as the brutes which
perish. The sacrifices made by Great Britain in this cause are ever
a subject of ridicule with the Mozambiquers; and they never lose an
opportunity of retaliating in their own way upon those persons belonging
to the English nation who may unfortunately fall into their power. Each
individual is made answerable for the wrongs which they perseveringly
assert have been heaped upon them by the suppression of the slave-trade,
and even this feeling is carried out to the natives of India who may be
under our rule or our protection.

I heard, from time to time, of some arbitrary measure adopted towards
the Banyans, who are natives of India, trading in their sailing vessels
called dhows, from various places on the Malabar coast to that of the
coast of Africa. These men come over in their dhows from Goâ, which is
a Portuguese settlement, and from the British settlement at Bombay, and
also from Cutch, where there is a British resident, in the season of the
N.E. monsoon, which blows from the month of April to that of September
or October. They bring over to Mozambique what may be called the refuse
of the European goods sent out to the Indian market, where they find a
ready sale.

In exchange, they take back principally ivory, which, being resold
in India, finds its way to Europe and America, as the best Indian
transparent ivory, which is really obtained at Zanzibar and Mozambique.
The profits derived from the trade which they carry on with Mozambique,
to which place all the ivory of the province generally finds its way, are
so considerable that the Banyans are induced to submit to great exactions
and considerable injustice. They have no appeal, and must either put up
with the robberies to which they are liable, or entirely abandon the
trade.

It may be easily imagined that they rejoiced on seeing a British consul
established at Mozambique; and they testified their satisfaction at my
arrival in a variety of ways, more especially those who were sailing
their dhows under the British ensign. They complained to me generally of
the exorbitant tariff, and that they had been led to believe, year after
year, that it would be altered. They complained of the unjust manner
in which the duties were levied, and the robberies to which they had to
submit from the officials in the Custom-house, against whom they dare
not complain without incurring considerable delays in their business,
and for which there was no redress; that the only means left to them was
by bribing the officials, which was a great burden on their fair gains;
and ended by saying, that if some protection was not afforded them,
they would be compelled to abandon the trade altogether, as numbers had
already done. These men were so intimidated by the Portuguese officials,
that they feared to state even to me, their consul, the particulars of
their losses, saying that, in the event of anything happening to me,
they would be marked by the officials, and ruined; and they only prayed
that I would generally supervise their affairs, and, in the event of
any flagrant act of injustice occurring while at the port, that I would
afford them that protection which they were always led to expect from a
British functionary. It was with my mind thus prepared that the following
piratical affair was brought under my notice:—

The Cutch dhow, “Ari-passa,” on a trading voyage, arrived at Zanzibar, in
the African dominions of the Imâm of Muskat, in the month of July, 1857,
which port she left on the 14th July, bound for Port Mozambique, with
instructions to call at Ibo on the passage down. On leaving Zanzibar, her
passport was duly _visé_ by Colonel Hamerton, the British consul at that
port, and all her papers were correct.

After going into the harbour of Ibo, the captain found that there was
a great difficulty in obtaining his passport from the Governor; and as
there was a considerable amount of money on board the dhow, he became
alarmed for its safety, and also, I may add, for his own. However,
after loudly complaining of the detention, and making some very strong
observations on the cause of his detention, he was permitted to leave
Ibo, and proceeded on his voyage to Mozambique. He found the wind south,
or dead against him, and consequently, every night, he, as is customary
with the dhows, stood in and anchored under the land, getting under weigh
at daylight every morning.

It will be remembered that Vasco Guedes, then Governor-general of the
province of Mozambique, had refused to supersede the governor of Ibo,[1]
for supplying slaves to the “Minnetonka” American slaver, which left
Ibo with a cargo of 1,200 slaves for Havannah de Cuba. The real reason
for the Governor-general not superseding this delinquent governor was,
that he kept his accounts properly—or, in other words, gave to the
Governor-general a share of the head money for the slaves exported from
Ibo, this share being (as I have already stated) six dollars for every
negro shipped on board the French Free Labour ships, or the Spanish and
American slavers.

We have seen these two officers, representing the King of Portugal,
in defiance of all laws and commands to the contrary, engaged in the
nefarious traffic in their fellow-beings.

One would imagine that this was bad enough, but the Governor-general had
received an intimation that his successor had left Lisbon in the month of
May, and there was no time to be lost—every opportunity must be seized
for making money; so thought his worthy coadjutor at Ibo. He dare not
take upon himself to plunder a vessel openly in the harbour of Ibo, but
he wrote to the Governor-general of Mozambique, to inform him that this
dhow was on its way to Port Mozambique, and he detained her at Ibo to
give his superior time to act.

About the 20th of August, I heard that a Portuguese schooner of war,
called “19 de Maio,” had left Port Mozambique, and was bound to the
northward to intercept a dhow coming from Ibo, with a large quantity of
bullion on board. At that time a number of extraordinary revelations
were made to me relative to the slave-trade, and French Free Labour
Immigration; and I naturally inquired if it was usual to intercept
traders in this manner. I was told that it was not usual, but that such
things did occasionally occur. I asked if the authorities had no fear of
the matter being inquired into? I was answered with a laugh, and informed
that “there was no one to inquire into these matters.” If inquiry was
made, the reply was that the vessel had been seized for attempting
to smuggle with the shore, or that it had been done to suppress the
slave-trade. This was always satisfactory. But in making such a capture
occasionally vessels were scuttled, when they gave no further trouble. It
was evident that I was living in a nest of pirates. Let us come to the
facts again.

The dhow “Ari-passa” had been gradually working down to Port Mozambique.
On the 26th day of August, 1857, blowing fresh from the southward, she
endeavoured to get into Conducia Bay (since celebrated by the “Charles
et Georges” affair), but did not succeed in fetching it; she therefore
bore up, and ran away before the wind to the entrance of Quicimajulo Bay,
where she anchored, the wind still blowing fresh from the southward. Soon
after she had anchored, the Portuguese schooner of war, “19 de Maio,”
dashed alongside, and threw a party of soldiers on board of her. These
soldiers, under the direction of their officer, forced open the hatches;
and proceeded at once to the place where the boxes containing the bullion
were stowed; evidently being well instructed from Ibo. They removed the
money to the schooner, and then amused themselves by breaking open the
boxes containing the cargo, after which the night was passed in scenes
of revolting debauchery which cannot even be alluded to.

The captain and three of the crew were taken on board the schooner as
prisoners; and, the next day, the schooner and her prize weighed, and
after two days arrived at Mozambique.

As no house could be obtained for me in the city of Mozambique, I was
obliged to live on the mainland; which had the object desired by the
slave-dealers at Mozambique, who had all conspired not to let me have a
house in the city, namely, to prevent my obtaining a knowledge of all
their movements. In consequence of this, it was a day or two before the
real state of the case came to my knowledge.

It appears that, on the arrival of the “Ari-passa” at Mozambique, the
Banyans became very excited, and induced the captain to demand his
release, and the immediate restoration of the vessel, asserting their
intention of appealing to the British consul. The Governor-general, it
appears, regretted the occurrence when he found the vessel had been
brought into harbour, and had a British passport; but as the foolish
captors had not sunk the vessel, it was necessary to put a bold face on
the matter, and therefore a temporizing course was adopted. The prisoners
were set at liberty, and vague promises made to them, with which not
being satisfied, they asked permission to visit the British consul on
the mainland; at first this was refused, but at length permission was
granted, and a deputation waited upon me, and stated the case. The
information which I had received relative to the destination of the
Portuguese schooner, “19 de Maio,” came to my recollection, and I found
that the “Ari-passa” was the vessel which she had been sent to capture.

The facts of the case were duly deposed before me by Hery, the captain of
the dhow; and I made myself thoroughly master of the whole subject, by
examining a number of the crew, and inquiry into the whole circumstances
of the affair.

I then addressed the Governor-general in writing, and asked His
Excellency to inform me, why the dhow “Ari-passa” had been seized, and
her crew, under British protection, had been ill-treated and imprisoned?
To which he replied that the “Ari-passa” was “found in communication with
Quitangonha, which was forbidden, and in consequence she was seized, as
being suspected of smuggling, and she was delivered to the tribunals
according to law.”

Now, I knew that being delivered to the “tribunals according to law”
meant that, having been plundered of the bullion by the Governor-general,
she was then handed over to the judge, to see what he could make out of
her in the way of a bribe, or fine, to release her and her cargo; and was
only submitting to be further robbed. It was, therefore, necessary to
adopt bold measures, and to let Vasco Guedes know that I was acquainted
with the circumstances connected with her capture. And although I could
not write and state what I knew about the Governor of Ibo writing to
him relative to the “Ari-passa,” and the arrangements which were made
in consequence, because I would then have to state who my informant
was, still I addressed His Excellency in such a manner that he could
not doubt that I was fully aware of _all_ that had taken place. I
particularly pointed out that the vessel was seized at anchor at the
entrance of Quicimajulo Bay, which was, at least, twenty miles from
Quitangonha; that she had simply anchored from stress of weather; that it
was usual for dhows working along the coast to anchor every night, and
that the vessel had not communicated with the shore. I then stated the
manner in which the dhow had been boarded by the “19 de Maio,” by dashing
alongside like a pirate, and throwing a party of armed boarders on to
the deck of a peaceful trader, laying emphasis on the manner in which
the soldiers had broken open the boxes containing money, and rifled the
cases containing cargo, and designated the whole affair as an illegal
and piratical seizure. “_Suaviter in modo et fortiter in re_,”—is a good
diplomatic motto; but, in dealing with Portuguese one must not forget the
“_fortiter in re_.”

The Governor-general’s reply is one of the richest things on record. He
commences by stating:—

“That it is with regret that he sees a vessel, the flag of which is
under the protection of Great Britain, engaged in illicit commerce, more
especially as in the province of Mozambique every facility is afforded
for legitimate commerce to ships of all nations, and particularly to
those of a friendly ally.

“That in regard to the deposition of the captain of the ‘Ari-passa,’
which I had sent to him, he doubts its correctness; for the captain does
not mention her stay at Ibo, which was the most important circumstance
connected with his voyage. That the dhows from India bear very suspicious
characters; as a proof of which, one of the dhows from India lately
entered the port with a cargo of fire-wood! But, however the matter
may be, it was not for his Excellency and myself to settle it, but the
tribunals, before which the depositions ought to be made.”

His Excellency then indulged in a geographical disquisition relative to
Quicimajulo and Quitanhonga, and admitted that my knowledge might be
correct as to their relative positions.

With reference to the conduct of the soldiers who boarded the
“Ari-passa,” he reminded me of what the illustrious Lord Wellington
himself states as to the conduct of his soldiers in the Peninsula,
contained in his letters addressed to Viscount Castlereagh; and, also,
begs me to bear in mind that, it is said, similar acts are practised
by the British cruisers on the coast of Angola, and also on that of
Mozambique; and that, in fine, he possesses a document of a recent date,
in which the depositions of the crew and passengers are given, of one
of the Portuguese vessels coming from India, which, being at anchor
in Conducia Bay, was boarded by a boat from a British cruiser; that
the officers searched the Portuguese vessel, broke the seals of the
dispatches addressed to the custom-house, and endeavoured also, during
the night, to introduce chains, or slave-irons, on board the vessel, so
as to seize her as a slaver.

The fact of the matter was, that the Governor-general, at that time, was
hard pressed by me on the subject of the slave-trade. I had discovered,
in the short space of a month, all the ramifications of the slave-trade
which he had established at Mozambique, under the denomination of the
French Free Labour Emigration Scheme, and how the victims for that
traffic were supplied from the interior of Africa, renewing the horrors
of the slave-trade in the heart of that continent.

This letter was evidently written to annoy and irritate the British
consul; but, coming from such a source, I could well afford to smile
at the insult to my country, in comparing the glorious soldiers of
Wellington, who, on their victorious bayonets, carried liberty to Spain
and Portugal, to the convicted and degraded felons who formed the
soldiery of Mozambique. In regard to the statement directed against
the British navy, I simply let that matter rest until the arrival of a
British ship of war, the commander of which considered it beneath notice.

The Scotchman kept his temper, and simply renewed his demand for the
unconditional release of the “Ari-passa.” Some days afterwards I received
an invitation for my wife and myself to drink a cup of tea at the palace;
and a postscript was added by his Excellency, intimating that the
“Ari-passa” was restored!

Yes, the “Ari-passa” was restored, because there was a British consul
there to protect her; but how many “Ari-passas” have been seized
and plundered without redress! Some portion of the money which had
been robbed from this vessel could not be found when restoration was
ordered; this was put down to the soldiers, who had been compared to the
companions of Wellington; but the Banyan appeared well contented with
what was given back to him, and begged me to let the matter drop.

It is necessary to show how this affair affected the owner of the
“Ari-passa.” In consequence of her seizure, and the delay in restoring
the vessel, she could not get away from Mozambique for her return voyage
to Bombay, whither she was bound, until late in the month of September.
On the voyage across the Indian Ocean the south-west monsoon failed
her, and she was obliged to bear up for Zanzibar, from which place
she returned to Mozambique in the month of December, 1857. She was in
Mozambique harbour during the hurricane on the 1st of April, 1858, during
which she suffered considerable damage, and was nearly lost. Had she
reached Bombay in the end of 1857, her valuable cargo would have arrived
at a good market; but as she could not leave Mozambique until after the
setting in of the south-west monsoon, she did not reach her destination
until late in 1858, when we all know she found a depreciated market for
her cargo, owing to the Indian mutiny. Add to this the loss sustained by
the depreciation of the value of her cargo by being so long in her hold,
the wages and keep of her crew, and the loss of the vessel’s earnings
during twelve months.

At Mozambique I obtained her release; and the same sense of duty to my
country induces me to make the affair known in England, in order that
the merchants of Great Britain may urge upon the British government that
redress to which the mercantile community of this country are entitled.
Be it remembered that these dhows frequenting Mozambique from Bombay, and
other places in India, are laden with British goods sent to supply the
Indian markets, and thence exported to East Africa.

I have already mentioned that when at Natal, on my way to Mozambique, a
deputation from the Chamber of Commerce of Natal did me the honour of
waiting upon me, in order to bring forcibly before my notice the great
desire of the enterprising merchants of that young and energetic colony
to trade with the neighbouring Portuguese possessions, and to explain
the great and apparently insurmountable obstacles to carrying on any
relations with the rich tract of country lying between Cape Delgado and
Delagoa Bay.

The following letter, among others, was addressed to me by Mr. Cato of
that place:—

    (Copy.)

                                        “PORT NATAL, 6th July, 1857.

    “DEAR SIR,

    “I am glad that H.M.S. ‘Hermes’ called off this port, as it has
    afforded me the pleasure of paying my respects to you on your
    way to your Consulate, which I trust will be the commencement
    of more extended relations.

    “I have long been anxious to see a trade established between
    this port and some of the ports to the northward; but the
    difficulties, official and others, have been so great, that no
    honest man could overcome, and make his trading speculation pay
    him. The duties and port charges demanded at the said ports
    have been the cause of complaint with every person that I have
    known attempt to trade in that direction.

    “Should you at any time wish to send letters overland to this
    place, I would advise that they be sent to the Norwegian
    mission station in the Zulu country, addressed to me.

    “The head of the mission in that country is the Rev. H.
    Schreuder—the farthest station from this is the Empangeni.

    “On your arrival at your destination, and at your convenience,
    if you would favour me with the tariff of duties and charges
    at the different ports within your jurisdiction, I should
    feel obliged;—also—if not asking too much—add the facilities
    at those ports—pilots, boats, depth of water on the bars,
    produce obtainable, articles in demand, with any information
    you may think proper, or likely to lead to a trade. Placing my
    services at your disposal,

    “I have the honour to be, dear Sir,

                           “Yours obediently,

                                                        “G. C. CATO.

    “To LYONS M’LEOD, ESQ., H.M. Consul, East Coast of Africa.

    “Allow me to mention that I have the honour to represent
    at this port—Swedish and Norwegian Vice-Consul, Danish
    Vice-Consul, American Consular Agent, and Lloyd’s Agent.

                                                       “G. C. CATO.”

From the above letter it will be observed what a strong desire there
was for trade with the province of Mozambique, and an anxious inquiry
as to the capabilities of the country, of which little is known even at
Natal, and much less in the mother country. It is to be hoped that this
work will supply the wants of the mercantile community as to information
regarding the productions of this rich country, and also as to the proper
means of establishing commercial relations on a healthy basis.

Various attempts have been made to establish trade between Natal and
Delagoa Bay; and it is openly stated by the Portuguese at Delagoa Bay,
that more Englishmen have perished in these attempts from the poisoned
cup than from the deleterious climate. In England people may be startled
at this statement, but the Natal people will be only too glad to hear
that such a statement has gone forth to the world, as it may call for
a searching inquiry into the fate of those who have perished, and give
some hope that property, belonging to British subjects, now lying there,
may be restored. Any one who will visit Delagoa Bay may make himself
satisfied with the correctness of these statements; and, once for all,
let it be said, that nothing is asserted in this work which, if an
opportunity is given, cannot be proved.

I have already drawn attention to an able letter which appeared in the
_Natal Mercury_, from Mr. G. W. Duncan,[2] of Natal, on his return from
a trading voyage to Delagoa Bay. Not many months afterwards—viz., on the
15th of November, 1857, a small cutter named the “Herald,” of eleven
tons burthen, set sail from Port Natal, duly registered, and licensed for
a trading coast voyage. She was bound to the river King George, which
discharges itself into Delagoa Bay. The cutter was commanded by Mr. G. W.
Duncan, and his friend, Mr. Charles Hilliard, who had been on a former
voyage with Mr. Duncan, accompanied him as mate. The crew consisted of
three men.

To make this affair clearly understood, it will be necessary to explain
that the southern extreme limit of the Portuguese claim to possession
on the east coast of Africa was but ill defined until, in 1823, it was
settled by Captain W. F. Owen, R.N., when making his remarkable survey
of that coast. Without entering into minute details of the arrangement
made on that occasion, which it will be found is fully entered into in
another part of this work,[3] it will be necessary to state that a line
drawn due west from Cape Iniack marks the boundary of the Portuguese
and British possessions in that bay; the territory to the south of the
said line having been ceded to the British government by the natives of
the country in 1823. To the northward of that line lies that extensive
and valuable tract of country claimed by the Portuguese, to which the
natives everywhere dispute their right, and along which the Portuguese
have, as already explained at the opening of this chapter, a few insular
positions, from which they interfere with legitimate, and carry on slave,
trade.

The mouth of the river King George, to which the cutter “Herald” was
bound, is in Delagoa Bay, to the northward of the line already described,
and, consequently, within the line of coast claimed by the Portuguese.
The river King George is called by the natives Manakusi; they claim sole
right of dominion over the river, and acknowledge no superior power but
that of their king, Manakusi, and his subordinate chiefs.

It will be seen by the letter of Mr. Duncan, already referred to, that he
was fully aware that the Portuguese, in the adjoining small settlement
of Lourenço Marques, claimed the entrance to the river King George, and
that they informed him, in reply to a request to trade there, that if he
attempted to enter the river he was liable to seizure going in and coming
out. Nevertheless, the “Herald,” on this voyage, entered the river from
the sea, by a channel discovered by Mr. Duncan, and proceeded up it.

The object of the expedition was to open friendly relations with the
natives; to engage a hunting party, and establish an ivory trade, for
which purpose a piece of ground was to be purchased, and a wooden house
built for a depôt of goods and ivory.

The cargo of the “Herald” was well selected for the trade proposed to
be established. The cutter and cargo were valued at 1,200_l._, and
the estimated clear profit, after paying the amount invested, and all
expenses and charges, was 2,400_l._, being a return of 200 per cent. on
the original outlay. This instance alone will show what immense profits
would be derived from trading with the natives, if the east coast of
Africa was thrown open to legitimate traffic; and how the immediate
neighbouring British colony of Natal would be enriched.

The Portuguese, from their neighbouring settlement of Lourenço Marques,
are occasionally permitted to ascend the river in boats; this permission
must first be obtained from the king of the river. When the application
is made, it is always accompanied by a present; and if granted, which
is only done in the trading season, the king demands a present from
each boat ascending the river. Whenever the Portuguese have attempted
to ascend the river without permission from the king, they have been
attacked by the natives, and, if captured, compelled to pay a heavy
ransom.

The “Herald” proceeded up the river, and the king, Manakusi, having heard
of the arrival of an English vessel in the river to trade, immediately
sent messengers with a welcome, who were returned with presents for their
master.

Meanwhile, the Portuguese at Lourenço Marques heard of the entrance
of this small English vessel into the river King George, and in her
immediately recognized the “Herald,” which had been trading with
themselves some months previous. Governor Mochado had received a copy
of Mr. Duncan’s letter, which appeared in the _Natal Mercury_, and so
fearfully exposed what was going on at Lourenço Marques; and he longed
to be revenged on the Englishman who had dared to publish what he had
seen. Lieutenant Silva was despatched in charge of nearly the whole of
the available force at Lourenço Marques, and that officer found himself
placed at the head of a formidable force, consisting of about 100 men,
armed with old flint muskets, principally negroes belonging to the
Crown, assisted by a few of the convict soldiers who formed the garrison
of that place. They were embarked in three large launches, without any
sails, and a very short supply of oars, ammunition, and provisions. It is
therefore not surprising that they took more than two weeks to overtake
the “Herald,” which, at that time, was about 120 miles up the river.
On the 6th of December, the “Herald” was overtaken by this formidable
party. The advanced force consisted, of course, of armed negroes; and
Captain Duncan, imagining that they might be the natives of the country
meditating an attack, anchored the cutter, and prepared to defend the
vessel. But on the other two launches, with troops in them, making
their appearance, he began to surmise whence the hostile force had
come. Observing the “Herald” anchor, and prepare to defend herself, the
Portuguese launches dropped down the river, landed a party on each bank,
and took up a position on either side, abreast of the cutter. Mr. Duncan
hereupon hailed the soldiers in Portuguese, to request their commandant
to come alongside, informing them that he was not a pirate, but a trader.

The commandant accordingly came alongside, and informed Mr. Duncan that
he had orders from the Governor of Lourenço Marques to take the cutter,
and all she contained, together with all on board, to Governor Mochado.

Mr. Duncan, believing that he was in native waters, over which King
Manakusi had dominion, asked Lieutenant Silva for his authority. That
officer replied that intelligence had been received from a native chief
that a boat, unlike any which had been seen before, had gone up the
river; and that the chief, fearing those on board, had solicited the
assistance of the Portuguese government at Lourenço Marques. Mr. Duncan
replied that he was quite sure that such was not the impression at that
time, for he had already established friendly relations. To which the
commandant replied that he had his orders, and must comply with them.

Mr. Duncan now informed his captor that he had two men on shore, and
that he could not consent to leave without them; and Lieutenant Silva
consented to their being sent for.

The news soon spread of the interruption to the trade which was just
about opening between the natives and the English, and a formidable
number of negroes collected from all parts. The position of the English
was soon made known to the natives, by the negroes belonging to the
Portuguese; and the natives claimed the cutter for their prize, alleging
that she was in their waters, where the Portuguese had never been before.
Shortly afterwards, a conference took place between the contending
parties, viz., the Portuguese officers and the native chiefs. The native
chiefs declared that if they gave up their claim to the vessel, they
certainly would have a handsome ransom. Lieutenant Silva sent for
Mr. Duncan, and informing him what had passed at the conference with
the chiefs, stated that he thought Mr. Duncan would have to sacrifice
half, if not the whole, of the cargo to get out of the river, and
begged him earnestly to sacrifice the cargo to save the lives of the
party. Mr. Duncan said it was too late that night to do anything; he
would consider the matter, and give his decision next morning. On the
following morning, December the 8th, Mr. Duncan took an early opportunity
of informing Lieutenant Silva that he considered himself his prisoner,
and the vessel his capture—whether illegal or otherwise, was a matter
for after-consideration; that he consequently ceased to exercise any
authority over the cargo, and the commandant might do as he pleased. But
that, although a prisoner, if it was the commandant’s intention to fight
his way, he might depend upon him for assistance.

Meanwhile, the natives had not been idle. Under the direction of their
king they had made the river impassable, until such time as their wants
were satisfied. During the previous day, and on the morning of the
8th, canoes were observed floating down the river—sometimes one alone,
at other times two or three lashed together; these were collected at a
narrow part of the river, and with them a boom was formed, rendering all
exit from the river impossible. Above this boom, on each side of the
river, an army (as the natives called it) was placed; and the king gave
Lieutenant Silva to understand that it was his intention to enforce his
sovereign rights, and make the commandant pay handsomely for the ransom
of himself and party, when he might take the cutter with him; warning
him that next time he came up the river, without previously receiving
permission from King Manakusi, the consequences would be more serious.
Another attempt was made to induce Mr. Duncan to pay the ransom, but he
simply replied that he was no longer a free agent, but a prisoner.

At last, after much disputation with the natives, Lieutenant Silva,
commandant of the Portuguese force, took from the cargo of the British
cutter “Herald” sixty pounds sterling worth of goods, to pay for the
release of himself and party, and to be permitted to take with him the
“Herald.” The boom was then removed, and King Manakusi bade him “go!”—at
the same time warning him what the consequences would be, not only to any
Portuguese whom he might find in the river without his permission, but to
the settlement at Lourenço Marques, if they again attempted to infringe
on his territory. This Lieutenant Silva knew was no idle threat; for the
fort, as it is called, at Lourenço Marques, is frequently in imminent
peril from the natives, who generally inflict some punishment on the
Portuguese annually, after the trading season is ended, as a return for
some injury inflicted during that period.

Previous to getting under weigh, the two men who were missing from the
“Herald” joined the party, one being ill with fever.

Soon after weighing, it became apparent that the captors were quite
incompetent to manage the prize, and Lieutenant Silva was obliged to ask
Mr. Duncan to navigate the “Herald” to Lourenço Marques. The following
remarks are from Mr. Duncan’s journal, and show the relative position of
the English and the Portuguese in this affair:—

“On our way down the river, it was somewhat novel that, although
prisoners, we were left on board to enjoy our floating home, contrary
to all instructions; a condescension worthy of esteem, had it emanated
from a feeling of sympathy or kindness; for although the accommodation on
board our cutter was far from being sufficient for any length of time,
yet it was a palace compared with the wretched condition which those
miserable creatures were in, in their open boats, and which we should
have had to endure, had it not been that on us alone they depended to
take their cutter with a deck-load of their vermin to Lourenço Marques;
for though so many in number, there was not one sailor among them who
could work the craft.

“This doubtless will appear strange, especially to persons who understand
the nature of such an expedition, not to be provided with a few mariners
to carry out, to the strict letter, their orders. What could be more
absurd than to entrust those whom they considered their prisoners to take
the cutter, and a host of their force on board, to where they had orders
to take her? Doubtless it was to their overwhelming numbers compared
with us, more especially as they were armed to the teeth, that they
trusted. But could they have conceived the danger they placed themselves
in, they would have been glad to take to their boats when we got into
the open bay, and let us go; for nothing could have been more easy, with
a strong breeze blowing from the southward and eastward, having a good
offing, and the sea running considerably high, than to have washed the
deck, and rid ourselves of the nuisance. Nothing but an opinion of their
proceedings being unlawful, and a hope of having full damages awarded
through the official interposition of H.M. Consul, Mr. M’Leod, prevented
me ridding the world of an intolerable portion of its offscourings.

“On the evening of the third day’s sail down the river we arrived at
Lourenço Marques harbour, and shortly after coming to an anchor, an order
came for the rudder of the cutter to be unshipped and sent on shore;
between ten and eleven o’clock another order, for her mainsail to be
unbent and sent on shore, together with the guns, which had been kept
loaded in the cabin, and the ship’s papers. Next day, an order came
for the cutter to be got under weigh and laid on the beach, without her
rudder and mainsail, and a fresh breeze blowing off the land.

“As it was to me the Governor sent the orders, I refused to comply,
telling him that I would not undertake to do any such thing—that I
considered his orders absurd,—that I thought I had done sufficient in
bringing the vessel, cargo, Portuguese troops, and his people safe into
port—that if he wished to humbug the boat about, he must send men of his
own, and at his own risk. Shortly afterwards, a large barge was sent off,
manned with negroes, to tow her on shore, which was accomplished, but not
without considerable difficulty.

“On the following day, Saturday, the 12th December, everything was taken
out of her and carried into the fort. That done, we were all ordered to
land, and marched into the fort, the sick among us being placed in the
same room.

“In the afternoon, myself and two others were ordered back to the boat,
the sick sent to a place on the opposite side of the square in the fort,
called an infirmary, a most wretched apology for one; it was far inferior
to the one attached to the D’Urban Gaol in comfort, although much larger.
The scenes witnessed there by our sick I leave them to describe, should
they be disposed to do so. As to the district surgeon, his attention, and
the use of means placed at his disposal, nothing can be said against him.

“A Portuguese who had shipped with us as cook was kept in the fort,
and allowed greater latitude than any of us who were sent on board the
cutter. He was allowed to walk in and out of the fort at pleasure, and
to dispose of a number of articles which, with the assistance of the
Portuguese guard, he had stolen from the cargo of the ‘Herald.’

“Why this Portuguese should be allowed to remain in the vessel when all
were ordered on shore, he being one of the crew, seems strange, and
more so that he should be kept in the fort when we were ordered back
to the ‘Herald;’ except it is, as I have since imagined, to make him
an instrument to effect some purpose for which he is very capable; for
a more unmitigated scoundrel never could exist. I said that he is an
instrument to effect some purpose; for, on our embarking on board the
brig ‘Clara,’ all the officers belonging to Lourenço Marques were on
board; and on their leaving the vessel I heard the Commandant-Lieutenant
Silva say, ‘You know what has been said to you, take care!’ To which he
replied that he would.

“On Monday, the 21st December, 1857, we set sail for Mozambique, on board
of a Portuguese brig, called ‘Clara,’ commanded by Señhor José Antonio
de Olliveira. Their object in sending us is as yet a mystery, nothing
having been said to us by any of the authorities. Nor was I summoned to
appear before any one to answer for myself, except before the Collector
of Customs, to whose office I was marched under a guard of four soldiers
and a corporal, armed with muskets and fixed bayonets,—treated more like
a brigand than a man endeavouring to establish friendly and peaceable
commercial relations among that portion of the uncivilized inhabitants
dwelling on the banks of the river King George.

“Our passage to Mozambique was more than persons in our circumstances
could possibly expect. Strange to say, after the barbarous treatment
I had received during my stay of nine days, a close prisoner on board
the cutter, with a guard of four soldiers over me, that a cabin passage
should have been provided for me, with everything necessary for my
support and comfort at discretion. Those of the crew, five in number,
were not so comfortable as I should have wished, there being no other
accommodation for them than the longboat, with a tarpaulin for an
awning. Two of them were very ill from the effects of marsh fever, one
especially being, as I considered, in a dangerous state; but who has up
to the present gradually improved, by taking the medicines that I had
fortunately provided, their properties being very efficacious.

“With respect to the kindness of Captain José Antonio Olliveira, his
officers and crew, to assist in promoting the comfort of our party while
on board the ‘Clara,’ too much cannot be said; more especially the
captain, who was a perfect gentleman, and worthy of that name in its
purest sense, the very opposite, indeed, of almost all of his countrymen
at Lourenço Marques, Governor Mochado included. I had, indeed, many
fears, on embarking, that ill-treatment would have been continued during
our passage; but happy am I to state that, amidst many troubles, the
passage to Mozambique was an interval of ease and plenty, added to which
was the pleasure derived from delightful weather. Nothing could have
proved a greater relief and change (except that of being homeward-bound
in our little craft), from what we had suffered under the Russian
despotism of the Portuguese Governor Mochado, at Lourenço Marques.

“The care of those of our party who were sick, and the fear that they
would not survive the passage, caused me great anxiety; but when in
that I was favoured, having the daily pleasure of seeing them rapidly
improving, nothing, at last, seemed to burden my mind, excepting a strong
desire of arriving at Mozambique, buoyed with the hope that through the
official interposition of H.B.M.’s Consul, Mr. M’Leod, we would meet with
a speedy settlement of the affair, and thereby enable me the sooner to
return to Natal.

“This composure and satisfaction for myself, and for those who were
with me, was not continued to me long, for on the 31st December I had
the pain of reading the burial-service over the remains of one of my
crew, John Fysh, a young man, aged nineteen years, who not many days
previous enjoyed perfect health, and who was remarked by all on board as
a fine, healthy young man. On the 23rd December, about ten o’clock in the
evening, I was pacing the deck, when the deceased appeared coming from
the forepart of the ship; I seriously reproved him for his imprudence in
being on deck so late in a heavy cold dew, after an excessively hot day,
with nothing on but light trousers and a very thin flannel. The following
day he did not appear well, but did not complain; the day after I went to
see him, found him very feverish, and gave searching medicine.

“On Sunday, the 27th, according to his own statement, feeling as well as
he ever did, he dressed himself, and in the hottest part of the forenoon
I saw him under the port-bow of the longboat, on his knees, cutting out a
pair of trousers for one of the ship’s company. I reproved him, telling
him that it was the Sabbath-day, and that the scorching heat of the sun
under the lee of the boat might affect him more than the dew had a few
days previous. On Monday he complained of not being well, but did not
seem much indisposed. On Tuesday he was very bad. I gave him medicine,
and blistered him on the back of the head, kept him on low diet, &c., but
the treatment adopted had no effect.”

On the 3rd January, 1858, the Portuguese brig “Clara” arrived at
Mozambique, when Mr. Duncan and his unfortunate companions claimed the
protection of the British consul, and the next day they were provided for
by me.

The following extract from the statement of Mr. Charles Hilliard, a
highly intelligent man, who accompanied Mr. Duncan as his mate, in the
“Herald,” throws additional light on this affair, and shows us that
considerable changes among the Portuguese on the east coast of Africa
must take place if commercial relations are to be established with the
interior of the country by way of the magnificent rivers on that coast:—

“On a previous trip to Lourenço Marques, Captain Duncan had, out of
charity, taken three poor starving wretches, by permission of the
Portuguese Governor of that place, to Natal. One of these men, João
Alberto, shipped with us on this voyage as cook and interpreter,
pretending also to a knowledge of the language of the natives to whom
we were going. After the seizure of the vessel by the Portuguese on our
way to Lourenço Marques, he ingratiated himself with the half-starved
soldiers who were on board, by stealing the ship’s bread for them at
night, in which he was several times detected. On the removal of the
cargo from the vessel to the fort, at Lourenço Marques, he gained the
patronage of the guard by treating them with liquor he had stolen from
the cabin, part of which I took from him while serving it out; and
in the confusion and pillage that took place, and which neither the
captain, myself, nor the custom-house officers could restrain, he was
leader, throwing articles out on the beach, breaking, and wasting their
contents. And in a scuffle that ensued for some private articles between
him, assisted by the guard, and a fellow from the shore called the
harbour-master, and one of the crew, John Fysh, he attempted the life of
Fysh, by stabbing him twice with a clasp knife; and I got some blows on
the breast from the butt of the corporal’s musket in endeavouring to save
Fysh.

“When we were sent back to the vessel, he was allowed to remain in
the fort, and to keep for his own use a number of articles, beads,
handkerchiefs, pieces of blue calico, &c., belonging to the cargo of
the vessel, which he had stolen with the assistance of the guard, and
afterwards sold; and in a few days many of the Portuguese troops were
dressed in new blue cotton jackets, the property of J. D. Koch, Esq., of
Natal.

“At Lourenço Marques he wanted to leave the cutter’s crew, but, finding
that if he did so the Portuguese would make him carry the musket again,
and give him a sound flogging into the bargain, he claimed the protection
of the British flag, and was sent on board the ‘Clara,’ where he again
refused to do anything, even to carry refreshments from the galley to
his sick shipmates; for which he was treated with just contempt by his
countrymen.

“During our stay at Delagoa Bay, no examination of any one, not even the
captain, took place respecting our voyage, nor were any questions asked
upon the subject.

“The object of the expedition was to open friendly commercial intercourse
with the natives of Manakusi, or River King George, for which we had an
assorted cargo, to engage a hunting party and obtain a place from the
natives, or build a house for a depôt of goods and ivory.

“As great stress has been laid on the monstrous ingratitude of Captain
Duncan (in the Portuguese despatches) in firing a pistol at Lieutenant
Silva (who had so generously come to save him), I assert that it is a
base falsehood, as Captain Duncan neither burnt a grain of gunpowder, nor
had a pistol in his hands during the affair. What did take place was done
by myself. One barrel of my rifle, which I was loading, not being clear,
I blew some loose powder out of it to clear it, but which I don’t believe
either the lieutenant, or any of his party, so much as saw the smoke of,
they having pulled away round a bend of the river below us, and were
wholly hidden from view by a thick border of high reeds.”

How it fared with the master and crew of the “Herald” at Mozambique will
be related in the following chapters. Meanwhile, enough has been stated
in this one to show the restrictions which are thrown in the way of
legitimate trade.




CHAPTER III.

    Escape of British Consul and Party from the Attack of the
    Natives—Supplies Cut Off—Governor-General Protects the
    Consul—Insolence of the Portuguese Guard—The Crew of the Cutter
    “Herald” Arrive—The Consul’s Position Improved—Insolence of the
    Portuguese Coxswain Exposed—The Governor-General furnishes the
    Consul with a Guard—The Slave-dealers Disband the Mozambique
    Police, and the Consul is without a Guard—Fever Attacks the
    Inmates of the Consul’s House—The Portuguese Doctors Refuse to
    Render any Assistance—Mr. Duncan Dies—Hurricane at Mozambique.


Having learned that there was a house to let at Messuril, I called upon
the owner of it in the city of Mozambique, and as he asked me a yearly
rent of seventy-five pounds sterling, and assured me “that it was just
the residence suitable for a British consul,” I determined to go and
see what it was like; and according to arrangement with the owner of
it, the next afternoon I went to Messuril, accompanied by Mrs. M’Leod
and her maid. On approaching the house, we saw at once that sending us
to look at it was intended as an insult, for it was nothing more than a
large hut with the walls whitewashed, and indeed was but little better
than the stable of the house I was then living in. However, as we had
seen the outside, we determined to look at the inside, and entered it for
that purpose, when we found there was not an apartment in it that would
contain my bed. Before entering the house, I had made a remark on the
loneliness of the situation, and what a distance it was from the sea;
and while examining the house, and smiling at the impertinence of those
who had played off such a practical joke on us, I observed that a number
of people were collecting round the carriage. I hurried my wife and her
maid into the carriage, and made the best of my way to the palace, as the
native war-drums were sounding, and a number of the natives, armed with
assegais and muskets, were collecting round us, yelling and shouting.
As soon as I got in sight of the guard at the palace of Messuril, the
natives stopped and made off to the road by which we usually went to
Messuril. Here I was met by one of the native Portuguese soldiers, who
desired me to save my party by taking the lower road nearer the sea.
I therefore pushed on for my house by that road, and when the natives
observed that we had escaped, they began yelling and shouting at their
own discomfiture.

In the time of Vasco Guedes, when he was encamped at Messuril with all
the available force in Mozambique, and the war was going on between him
and the natives, my wife, accompanied only by her maid, frequently drove
fearlessly through numbers of the natives; she was never annoyed, but
always treated by them with great respect.

I therefore brought this matter under the notice of the Governor in a
semi-official note, and he took care to have the guard on the alert at
Messuril after that occurrence.

Subsequently I had inquiries made among the natives, and I found that
a party of strange people, who had come in to barter, were engaged to
attack us; and that, humanly speaking, we owed our safety to going to
Messuril at an earlier hour than was anticipated.

Soon after this event, finding that we were not to be tempted into the
country again to our destruction, Mr. Soares sent one Sunday morning to
borrow the carriage and horse, and forgot to return them.

After this occurrence, the natives were ordered by their masters, the
neighbouring Portuguese, not to sell us anything; and some of them having
been seen to enter my house for the purpose of selling fowls and eggs,
they were waylaid by the overseers of the neighbouring plantations and
cruelly beaten.

Those slaves who were in the habit of bringing fire-wood to my house, by
the sale of which they obtained food for themselves, were forbidden to
come near the house; and there was a cordon of slaves established for
the purpose of preventing any supplies coming near us. But the slaves
were more considerate than their masters, and for a time some of the
very slaves who were set to keep a watch over the house, and prevent any
supplies reaching us, came after dark with wood, fowls, eggs, and milk.

This went on for some time, until they were betrayed by the other slaves
of our neighbours, when a more rigid look-out was established, and
regular night parties were told off, not only to watch the house for the
purpose of preventing any supplies arriving, but also to disturb us at
all hours of the night.

In the dead of the night a tremendous thumping would be heard at the door
of the house, disturbing us out of our sleep; when, on going to one of
the windows to see the cause of this disturbance, there would be no one
near the house. Hardly had I returned to my bed, when again I was obliged
to rise from the same cause.

I had recourse to the Governor-general in this state of affairs, and
he promised that he would establish a night patrol. Finding that this
was only a promise, after putting up with it for three weeks longer,
during which I had been frequently disturbed four, five, and six times
of a night, I addressed his Excellency officially, when he informed me
that this was the first intimation which he had received of my having
been molested, and forthwith he supplied me with a night patrol. The
annoyance ceased at once, and we had some rest at night.

However, the Capitain-Mor, commanding on the mainland, ordered the
patrolling to cease, and the slave-dealers, apprized by him of the
circumstance, ordered their slaves to renew their midnight attacks on my
house.

I was obliged to make another official intimation to the
Governor-general, when the patrol was restored, with an intimation from
the Governor-general that it had been discontinued without his knowledge,
and contrary to his express orders, and that he had, in consequence,
visited the Capitain-Mor with a severe reprimand, and directions to
continue the patrol as long as I remained resident on the mainland.

The Portuguese patrol now informed me that they were directed to intimate
to me their presence, and that they would do so as long as I desired
it. They arrived about eleven o’clock at night, and intimated their
presence by battering the house-door with the butts of their muskets.
They patrolled the house and grounds until four o’clock in the morning,
and during the whole of that time they kept up an incessant yelling from
one to the other. There were four men and a sergeant, and every time they
came to the front of the house they made an attack on the front door
with the butts of their muskets, accompanying the assault with the most
frightful oaths in Portuguese. When I remonstrated with the sergeant, he
coolly informed me that he was obeying his orders by thus intimating his
presence, and that he was instructed to do so on every occasion that he
visited the house; that my remonstrances were in vain, and that he would
continue this as long as I required a patrol. For three more nights this
continued, we in the house being obliged to go without any sleep. On the
fifth night a violent storm rid us of our persecutors; and, as I did not
make another official complaint to the Governor-general, the patrol was
discontinued.

As soon as the slave-dealers were aware of this, their slaves were sent
again to disturb us, during the night, not only by stoning the house at
all hours after dark, but even, at times, by firing musketry close under
the windows.

This state of affairs went on until, at last, we had no fire-wood to
light a fire, and all the old casks and packing-cases in the house were
being fast consumed. Since the desertion of the “Castor” frigate, things
were worse and worse, and I even found that the Governor-general could
not be prevailed upon to carry out the promises of assistance which he
had made me.

Finding that I had been so shamefully deserted by one of Her Majesty’s
ships, immediately after the seizure of the “Charles et Georges” he
began to be quite careless about the suppression of the slave-trade,
and informed me that, with the best intention, he found himself quite
powerless to protect me; in fact, he began to dread the consequences of
the decisive step which he had taken by seizing the “Charles et Georges;”
and, I believe, had made his mind up to see myself and family perish
from the state of starvation which we were in by the rigid blockade
established by the slave-dealers.

He knew that I had not a slave in my house, and that the only means of
communication which I had with him was in writing, by way of his palace
at Messuril. To get a letter there, I had to fee a negro well, for he ran
the risk of being flogged for having any communication with my house;
and, on his arrival at Messuril, he was obliged to fee the sergeant
of the guard to send the letter to Mozambique. The Governor-general
had promised to provide a house for me on the island, and in the city
of Mozambique, but he found he could not procure one—at least, so he
said. His Excellency had asked me to wait for some servants until the
“Charles et Georges” was condemned, and that then he would place under my
protection as many of the slaves comprising her cargo as I was willing
to take charge of, knowing, as he said, that they could not be in kinder
hands, until it was decided what was to be done with them. But here I
found that he had otherwise arranged, for, it having been represented
to him that if those slaves got into my hands I should be able to learn
who their masters were, and also who were the owners of the other slaves
on board of that vessel, it was decided that they should be returned to
their owners in the city of Mozambique.

On being apprized of this distribution of the slaves, it became more
certain that the state of imprisonment in which I was held on the
mainland was decided to continue.

Fortunately for me, at this juncture, the crew of the British cutter
“Herald,” which had been illegally seized by the Portuguese, when trading
with the natives in the Manakusi river, arrived at Mozambique, and the
Governor-general, now that I had some more witnesses to testify to the
treatment to which I was subjected by the officials and slave-dealers,
attended to my requisition for a government boat to communicate with him
relative to the cutter “Herald.” The Superintendent of the Dock-yard, a
notorious slave-dealer, sent this boat over for me without an awning,
in the mid-day sun, although, at all other times, the boat was fitted
with an awning. The object which he contemplated by this arrangement
was to give me fever by exposure to the sun. He succeeded in this. The
government slaves, who rowed the boat, were ordered by this officer not
to carry me into the boat, so that I would be compelled to walk _through
the water up to my knees_. The coxswain of the boat was made drunk, so
as to be excessively insolent to me.

On this occasion I was accompanied by the late Mr. G. W. Duncan, the
captain of the “Herald,” who, from having been in the Brazils some five
years, spoke Portuguese fluently. I had cautioned him not to speak a
word but English on the passage across to the town; and, on my arrival
at the palace, I complained to the Governor-general of the conduct of
the coxswain of the boat, and of his not allowing the crew to carry me
through the water into the boat; also, of his insolence on the passage
across. The Governor-general apologized for the absence of an awning,
which he said must have been accidental. He sent for the coxswain of
the boat, when he was satisfied of his not being sober. When asked for
an explanation of his conduct, he at first denied everything _in toto_,
and, of course, said that I had entirely mistaken his meaning. The
Governor-general hoped that I was satisfied, when I informed him that
I was by no means satisfied by the explanation given to him by the
drunken coxswain of the boat, and requested Mr. Duncan to explain to
His Excellency the nature of the language made use of by the Portuguese
coxswain.

Hereupon Mr. Duncan pulled out a small pocket-book; and to the
consternation of His Excellency, the coxswain, and the negroes, read
out of it some of the oaths made use of by the coxswain on the passage
across; and, commencing with our arrival on the beach, he, in the purest
Portuguese, described everything that had occurred until our arrival at
the palace, particularly dwelling upon the curses heaped upon the British
consul and the English nation by this Portuguese felon.

The Portuguese coxswain, finding the tables completely turned upon him,
informed the Governor-general that in all he had done he was only obeying
the orders of his superior, who took the awning out of the boat with his
own hands, and directed him not to allow the crew to carry me into the
boat.

The slaves, interrogated by the Governor-general, confirmed the statement
of the coxswain, while they stated that every word uttered by Mr. Duncan
in recounting the passage across was perfectly true. The Governor-general
made a most abject apology, and begged that I would make great allowances
for him when I saw him surrounded by such people.

Mr. Duncan and I now proceeded through the city, and prevailed upon some
of the Banyans to allow their slaves to come and serve in my house. By
this means we were enabled to collect a crew for my boat, which had been
lying idle, for want of hands, on the beach in front of my house for many
weeks.

Mr. Duncan took the boat in hand, and employed her between the house and
the city until we laid in a large stock of fire-wood, fowls, ducks, two
sheep, a goat, and two cows.

During this time the most strenuous endeavours were used to get the
slaves in my employment away, but we made the Banyans stick to the
agreement, which was in writing, and by that means got the consulate
provisioned.

We could not get the Portuguese to sell us any flour, but we hoped to
get some from vessels coming in. In this we were disappointed, for Mr.
Duncan was only able to get 12lbs. of flour from a German brig, and this
had to be obtained through the Portuguese custom-house officer on board
of her.

Soon after the arrival of the survivors of the crew of the British cutter
“Herald” at Mozambique, I succeeded in obtaining the house of Señhor José
Vincente de Gama, at the yearly rental of 400 dollars; and now that there
were a few more Englishmen in the port, the Governor-general was pleased
to furnish me with a guard consisting of four native policemen belonging
to the city of Mozambique, under the command of a Portuguese sergeant
from His Excellency’s body-guard.

The slaves of the neighbouring slave-dealers were not allowed to insult
me; the natives were permitted to approach the house and furnish us with
supplies; and the Banyans were persuaded to allow their slaves to come
and serve in my house. All this was in consequence of the presence of a
few Englishmen, and the persevering energy of Mr. Duncan, who thought he
could not do too much for the consul of his nation, to enable him to
maintain his post against the slave-dealers. Loud were the complaints
among all classes of the shameful desertion of H. M. Consul and the
Governor-general by the British frigate “Castor,” and by no party at
Mozambique was the captain of that vessel more thoroughly despised and
abused than the very slave-dealers who had been assisted by the absence
of a British ship of war.

Mr. Duncan and his mate, Mr. Charles Hilliard, both resided in my house,
while the remainder of the crew of the “Herald” lived in the city of
Mozambique.

Mr. Duncan gave the Portuguese very clearly to understand that their
treatment of the British consul should be made known to the world; and as
they already were aware that he had exposed slaving practices at Lourenço
Marques, by his letter in the “Natal Mercury,” they were afraid of him,
and consequently hated him intensely. I cautioned him at all times to
avoid eating or drinking with them when he had occasion to visit the city
of Mozambique to look after his crew. But having escaped the poison
cup at Lourenço Marques, he said that he felt he would live to expose
the infamy of these people to the world. Among other good offices which
he rendered us, he induced a Portuguese lady in the city of Mozambique
to allow her slaves to wash our linen; and thus my wife and poor Rosa
were relieved from labour which was absolutely killing them, with the
approaching sickly season before us.

Everybody spoke of the fearful season which was approaching; that it was
the seventh year since the awful hurricane and fatal season of 1851, and
that it was sure to be most destructive of life. Constant inquiries were
made relative to the health of the British consul and his family as the
season advanced, but Providence wonderfully protected us, as will be seen
in the following pages.

For a brief space after getting into our new house we had peace, and
we made the best use of our time by putting everything in order, and
laying in a good stock of supplies; we were successful in obtaining all
we stood in need of, excepting flour; but as we were able to buy bread
at Mozambique, after the arrival of the crew of the “Herald,” we hoped
that we would be able to hold out until the dhows began to come over from
Bombay.

The slave-dealers at Mozambique remonstrated with the Governor-general
for giving me a guard of police from Mozambique. His Excellency explained
that all the trustworthy men of the garrison were sick, and that it was
useless his sending men to guard me, who would give as much trouble as
the negroes who were sent to persecute me; and that, as he was compelled
to protect me, he could but furnish me with a police guard.

The Governor-general of Mozambique is entirely in the hands of the
Finance Committee, and they are governed by slave-trade interests.
Finding that remonstrance was useless, the Finance Committee informed the
Governor-general that they, from motives of economy, had disbanded the
police force, and, of course, next morning my guard vanished.

A few days afterwards the two cows and nearly all the poultry were
stolen. The butcher at Mozambique, from whom I had purchased the cows,
sent me word that they were at the palace of the Governor-general at
Messuril. At first the Governor-general refused to return them, alleging
that they were his property. The butcher went to his Excellency, and
stated that I had purchased the cows from him, they being his property.
Some days after the butcher had seen the Governor-general on this
subject, the cows were returned to me, and the butcher was put in prison.

Some days previous to this occurrence, Mr. Charles Hilliard, the mate of
the “Herald,” was attacked with fever, and after Mr. Duncan and myself
had completely despaired of his recovery, by the blessing of Providence
on my wife’s treatment of this fever, and her unwearied nursing, he
was enabled to get about again. He had five different attacks of this
most malignant fever before we left Mozambique, but, owing to his good
constitution and the treatment adopted in his case, he recovered, and
is now, I believe, in the enjoyment of the best health at Natal. Mr.
Duncan, in consequence of the illness of some of his men at Mozambique,
exposed himself a good deal, and, in fact, had never felt quite well
since his arrival at Mozambique, having suffered considerably from the
treatment he underwent at the hands of the Governor of Lourenço Marques.

On the 24th of February, he complained of headache, lassitude, loss of
memory, and pains in his back and limbs, being the usual symptoms of this
fever.

Having studied for the medical profession in his younger years, he had
some knowledge of the treatment of fevers in general, and adopted what
he considered was a most efficacious mode for his recovery. For this
purpose he had recourse to emetics, to clear the stomach; and, although
remonstrated with, he, by this treatment, so reduced the system, that
when we took him in hand, although we were able to keep him alive by the
use of quinine for some short time, still he never recovered sufficiently
to rally against the fever, and he positively died from sheer exhaustion,
the fever having in his case assumed the most malignant form.

Unfortunately, at the same time that Mr. Duncan was attacked with fever,
my wife had an attack of the same fever, but at first in a milder form,
and was of course confined to her room.

Rosa, observing a great change in Mr. Duncan on the evening of the 2nd
of March, communicated her fears of his approaching dissolution to her
mistress; and, in the hope of being able to suggest something for the
recovery of Mr. Duncan, my wife insisted on being wrapped up in blankets,
and taken to see him. Mrs. M’Leod was at the time in that stage of the
fever when it is so necessary to humour the patient, and by no means
to excite irritation by offering opposition to their wishes. Finding
that dissuasion only rendered her more determined to endeavour to be as
useful in his case as she had been in Mr. Hilliard’s, she was wrapped
in blankets, and conveyed to the side of the sufferer, when she at once
pronounced that there was no hope. Perceiving that he was partially
conscious, she endeavoured to prepare him for his approaching end, and
asked for any message he might have for her who was so soon to be a
widow. While trying to catch a few inarticulate sounds from the dying
man, she leaned over him, and, in her anxiety not to lose a sound, she
inhaled the fetid breath of him who was fast passing into eternity. The
consequence of this was that she had a putrid sore throat accompanying
her fever, and for six long weeks she was confined to her bed.

During the time that Mr. Duncan was dying, Mr. Hilliard was suffering
from another attack of fever, and for three days and nights I expected
from hour to hour to lose him.

The Portuguese frigate, “Don Ferdinand,” was lying in the harbour, on
her return from Goâ, and _en route_ to Lisbon. There were two medical
officers on board of that vessel; at the city of Mozambique there were
three medical men; and of these five doctors not one could be found to
visit the British consul’s house, with three people at the point of death
in it, although I made an application to the Governor-general for that
purpose.

To my neighbour, Brigadier Candido da Costa Soares, I applied, asking
him to send me his native doctor, in the hope of saving Mr. Duncan, and
suggesting something for the other sufferers; but although this man’s
son, João da Costa Soares, had been treated by my wife and myself, when
he was sick at the Cape of Good Hope, as if he had been our brother, he
brutally refused to send me any assistance.

I again applied to the Governor-general, begging him to send me a doctor,
and if he could not get the Portuguese doctors to visit my house, to
oblige me by sending his _aide-de-camp_ on board the French steamer of
war “Mahé Le Bourdonnais,” then in harbour, and ask the doctor of that
vessel to visit the sick in my house. The Governor-general was obliged to
ask the French doctor to visit us, for the Portuguese had made up their
mind to let us all die. His Excellency also procured a dozen leeches
for me, which were immediately applied to my wife’s throat, and had the
desired effect of giving her immediate relief.

When the French doctor visited us, he found my wife propped up with
pillows in bed, much relieved from the application of the leeches, and
engaged in making the shroud of our departed friend, Mr. Duncan. This
employment he of course forbade, and it was laid aside, but only to be
renewed on his departure. Mr. Hilliard was in that state that it was very
doubtful if he would recover, and Rosa he found had a low, nervous fever.
Poor girl, she was struggling hard to help her mistress.

That night a coffin was sent over by the Governor-general, in answer
to my application, and the next morning his Excellency sent a boat to
convey the remains of Mr. Duncan to their last resting-place. Previous
to their leaving, I had the coffin placed under a large tamarind tree in
the court-yard of my house, and, spreading over it my consular flag as a
pall, I read the beautiful service for the dead of the Church of England.

Rosa, at last worn out, had taken to her bed, unable to move; and my poor
dog “Belle” was the only one to mourn with me over my friend.

Having thus performed the last sad Christian rites over the remains of
the noble Duncan, and wrapped them in that flag which he loved so well,
I had them conveyed to the boat for interment in a grave by the side of
his countrymen, Captain Dacres, R.N., and Lieutenant Loch, R.N., which
the Governor-general was so considerate as to attend to. I wrote to the
survivors of his crew, and my German friend, to see him laid in his
grave. The sail was hoisted, and I turned from the service of the dead to
endeavour to save those who were between life and death.

Mr. Hilliard I found was quite sensible, and I made known to him that the
French doctor had strongly urged his removal to the hospital, as the only
chance of saving his life. I pointed out to him that even poor Rosa was
at last ill, and that I had no one to assist me about the house. He asked
for his friend Duncan, and I answered that “_he was better now_,” for he
was too ill to be informed of his death.

Looking at me very earnestly, he asked me to grant him one favour—to
allow him to remain in my house. I explained to him that I did not know
the moment when the fever might attack myself, and then there would be no
one to attend to his wants; and that he would perish from neglect; that
his only chance of being saved was going to the hospital, where there
were plenty of attendants.

To all this he replied by asking me in a tone and with an earnestness
that I could not resist, “To let him die under his own flag?” Of course
he remained in my house.

In a few days Rosa was herself again, but my wife was a long and patient
sufferer.

The French vessel proceeded to sea; the day after, the good young doctor
of her visited us, and I was then obliged to make an urgent official
application to the Governor-general for medical assistance. Dr. Fonseca,
the Surgeon Major, then visited the inmates of my house. For my wife he
prescribed manna, and what he called cream of tartar, and finding this
had not been taken on his second visit, he asked for a cup, in which he
placed the manna, and sprinkled over it the cream of tartar, instructing
me to fill the cup with warm water next morning, and, after mixing it
well, to insist upon my wife taking it.

On my asking when he would next visit us, he said that Mr. Hilliard’s
was a hopeless case; Rosa was quite well; and that after Mrs. M’Leod
had taken the medicine prescribed by him, “_she would require no more_;”
adding, that “it would, therefore, be unnecessary for him to call again.”

The next morning my wife took the medicine prescribed, which was
administered by my own hand, and I went to look at Hilliard. On my
return, I found my wife in the greatest agony, with Rosa hanging over
her. It appears that soon after my leaving the room the medicine had
acted as a violent emetic, and Rosa was attracted to the room by my
wife’s shrieks of agony, which I did not hear, being in the lower part
of the house. Mrs. M’Leod complained of a feeling of intense burning,
not only in her stomach, but in her throat, and during more than two
hours she endured great agony, during which we observed the curving
of the back, and twitching of the muscles, as described in cases of
poisoning from strychnine. Her belief is that an over-dose of poison
was administered to her, which, acting as an emetic, had not time to
lodge in the system. After this we felt that we had a better chance of
living without the attendance of Mozambique doctors than with them; and
consequently dispensed with their services for the remainder of our stay
at that place.

The sickly season had now set in, and it proved a very fatal one; numbers
of deaths occurred daily at Mozambique.

The Governor of Killimane had come out, with his wife and three
daughters, in the Portuguese frigate from Lisbon, in company with the
Governor-general. At first the mother fell a victim to the climate; and
on being apprized of this intelligence by the Governor-general, my wife
sent an invitation, through his Excellency, for the young ladies to
stay with us while they remained at Mozambique. But they very naturally
preferred remaining with their bereaved parent. They were all very ill,
and the youngest of the three died just before the hurricane, and was
buried during that great calamity which I am now going to describe.

On the 1st of April, 1858, the city of Mozambique, on the east coast
of Africa, situated in latitude 15° 2′ S., and longitude 40° 48′ E. of
Greenwich, was visited by a hurricane which in less than twenty-four
hours did more destruction to the city and surrounding districts than any
tempest in the memory of the oldest resident in these parts.

For some eight days this great convulsion of nature had been announced
by heavy rains, which laid in ruins many dwellings in the city, and
on the mainland; and more especially, since the 29th of March the
weather had been very uncertain—torrents of rain, changeable winds, an
atmosphere overcast with thick clouds, charged with electricity, were the
forerunners of a terrible tempest, which commenced on the morning of the
1st of April.

The following vessels were anchored in the harbour of Mozambique:—the
French schooner of war “l’Aigle;” the French barque, “Charles et
Georges;” the Portuguese ship, “Adamastor;” brigs, “Amisade,” “2 Irmaõs,”
and “Nostra Señhor de Soccorro,” “Flor do Mar;” schooners, “19 de Maio,”
“Esperança,” and “Livramento,” together with twenty-nine Arab dhows.

On Thursday, April the 1st, at six A.M., at the British consular
residence, Cabaçeira Grande, on the mainland of Port Mozambique, the
barometer B.T., No. 341, stood at 29·924 (t. 78°). The wind was from the
S. and S.W., very squally, and up to eleven A.M. very heavy showers, or
almost torrents of rain, came up from the S.W. At noon the barometer had
fallen to 29·800 (77°), when the wind commenced blowing furiously, the
horizon became less distinct, and the clouds denser and more lowering.

The wind kept increasing, and with it the sea in the harbour, until four
P.M., when the Portuguese schooner of war, “19 de Maio,” the Portuguese
schooner, “Livramento,” some of the dhows and other vessels, began to
drag their anchors. The blasts of wind were augmented in force, until
the tempest became furious at sunset; from which it gradually increased
in violence, so that all the dhows, with the exception of one called
the “Mantalla,” parted their cables; and some of them, as well as the
schooner, “19 de Maio,” and “Livramento,” were blown on the Cabaçeira
side of the harbour, and stranded there.

The schooner “Livramento,” thrown in the first place on the north side of
the harbour, turned upside down, and, when the wind chopped round from
the opposite quarter, she righted; then being forced afloat again by the
violence of the wind, she was again upset in the middle channel, or, as
it is called, the grand canal. Four men belonging to the crew of this
vessel were able to cling to that part of the hull which was not entirely
submerged, and were saved by the crew of the Portuguese ship “Adamastor,”
whose captain sent a boat to rescue these unfortunates.

At nine P.M. the wind appeared to lull, and almost gave rise to the hope
that the hurricane had passed. This lull was of short duration; the wind
appeared to cease, in order to commence afresh with greater fury, which
continued until eleven P.M.

The destruction that the first part of this terrible visitor had caused
was already considerable. The plantations on the mainland had suffered in
a great measure, many of the cocoa-nut trees having been uprooted, and
all stripped of their nuts; whilst temporary buildings, and even houses,
had been laid in ruins.

The city of Mozambique had suffered likewise, and up to this time
considerable damage had been done to the shipping in the harbour. In
my house on the mainland every precaution had been taken to resist the
hurricane; all doors and windows having been well secured, and even
the shutters of the latter were doubly secured by being screwed to the
frame-work of the windows. No opening was allowed for the entrance of the
wind.

Shortly before eleven P.M. I had observed the barometer, and placed
a lamp near a window to attract the attention of the unfortunate
shipwrecked mariners, or any of the natives whose huts might have been
destroyed by the tempest. From the barometer still continuing to fall, I
was led to believe that the centre of this revolving storm was passing
not far distant from my house. I had retired about ten minutes, when
suddenly the wind ceased, and was followed by a calm too horrible to
describe. Springing out of bed, I observed it was exactly 11 P.M., and
that the barometer, which an hour previous had stood at 29·000, had now
fallen to 28·740.

The wind had ceased; the sea suddenly became still, not a leaf
moved—nothing was heard but the lowing of the cattle, and the bleating
of the sheep, which had hitherto survived the storm, and these signs
of animal life added to the horror of so intense a calm after such a
convulsion of nature. The stars shone bright in the firmament of heaven,
more especially in the zenith, and the atmosphere had the most serene
appearance.

Since the commencement of this calm I had been narrowly watching the
barometer, and, instead of its rising, it continued to fall, so that I
might almost say that the mercury was seen to move in the tube. At 11h.
18m. P.M. the barometer had fallen to 28·700; at this instant a blast
of wind, never to be forgotten by those who experienced it, came from
the N.W., accompanied by rain, thunder, and lightning; blast upon blast
of wind succeeded each other rapidly, if possible, increasing in force.
Torrents of rain accompanied these blasts more rapidly and violently.

The heavens instantly became black and obscured—not a star was visible;
for twelve minutes the barometer was stationary; then at 11h. 30m. P.M.
it began to rise very gradually until midnight, when it was 28·720. At
this time I went to observe if the magnetic instruments were affected
by this storm, but the house shook so violently that it was impossible
to read the instruments; these instruments were placed on pillars of
solid masonry, which I had built for the purpose; the pillars were on the
ground-floor, or basement of the house, and the instruments were so much
agitated, that one was almost led to the belief that the ground on which
the pillars were built was moved by an earthquake, and yet I think that
it was only the violence of the wind.

My house was built of solid masonry, the outside walls from three to
three-and-a-half feet thick, and the partition walls at least three feet
thick. The houses are built with walls thus thick in order to make them
cool, and yet my house moved as if built of wood; and at one time, when
the wind came from the N.W., I expected it would have been swept into the
sea. It was much shaken at that time, and immediately afterwards the rain
began to make its way through the flat roof, and deluge the rooms.

Some idea of this blast of wind may be formed by my stating that I
counted upwards of four hundred cocoa-nut trees which had all been
uprooted by this one blast, the whole of them having been thrown on the
ground towards the south.

In the city of Mozambique, the frightful darkness of night, unillumined
by moon or stars, added to the horrors of the scene which this convulsion
of nature produced.

It was impossible to traverse the streets inundated with water. The sand
raised from the beach was formed into sand-whirlwinds, which reached to
a great altitude, and, breaking, descended with the torrents of rain
invading every place; the houses themselves, even those most solidly
built, trembled from the impetuous violence of the wind, and shook
everything contained in them. The rain deluged the houses; many trees,
and some of them gigantic, lost their limbs, which were carried great
distances; others, on which the first Portuguese voyagers had looked with
admiration for their enormous size, were now uprooted from their mother
earth, and laid beside their companions.

The shrubs and plants looked as if they had been burned by the fury of
the wind; not a garden escaped the ravages of this fearful storm.

All these direful events, heightened by the shrieks of the unfortunate,
which, at intervals, added to the howling and hissing of the wind,
increased the terror and consternation of the inhabitants of this doomed
city. Many huts were swept away by the wind; others, as fragile, being
saved by the fact of their being almost buried by the sand which the sea
and wind drove over the island. But if this was the terror and suffering
in the city, how much greater damage did the tempest cause in the harbour!

There the horrors of the tempest were increased by the fury of the sea,
the fragileness of the vessels, the frightful darkness of the night, and
the absolute impossibility of help from any quarter.

After the illusive calm already described, when the wind changed suddenly
to the N.W., just previous to midnight, the dhows commenced to get foul
of each other. Immediately all was disorder, confusion, and terror.
Some dhows were capsized; others were dashed to pieces on the beach,
or crumpled up among the rocks. In the middle of this sad disorder were
heard the despairing cries of the wretched sailors, calling for help, and
raising their hands to the Almighty to save them. To hear the piercing
cries of those men, child-like in the depth of their despair, was
heart-rending, but to witness their struggles when cast upon the beach,
and they came nigh being dashed against the rocks, without being able to
assist them, was horrible.

The numerous wrecks subsequently encountered on the shore of the island
of Mozambique attested, at the same time, the violence of the tempest and
the extent of this direful catastrophe. Sad to relate, among the _debris_
of the wrecks and cargoes on the beach, numerous corpses were met with.

The ship “Adamastor,” the barque “Charles et Georges,” and the brig
“Amisade,” were the only vessels at anchor in Mozambique that escaped.

The French schooner of war, “l’Aigle,” was only saved by her anchors
holding until 11 P.M.; she appeared to be anchored too close to the
beach; after that time she went on shore in consequence of two dhows
drifting on top of her, from whose crews she succeeded in saving fourteen
persons. She parted her anchor, lost her rudder, and was otherwise
injured, but the solidity of her construction prevented her making water,
and after the hurricane she was got afloat again.

The schooner belonging to the Portuguese government, called the “19 de
Maio,” was thrown on the Conducia or north shore of the harbour, with
little damage to her hull; as was likewise a dhow sent from Ibo, and
detained at this port for having four sea-pieces on board, which suffered
no damage. The brigs “2 Irmaõs,” “Nostra Señhor do Soccorro,” and “Flor
do Mar,” were beached, and more or less injured. On the mainland the
hurricane destroyed houses, swept away huts, uprooted gigantic trees,
killed many negroes and cattle, and levelled with the ground many
palm-trees, and in some places whole plantations of cocoa-nut trees, each
tree producing annually nuts to the value of three shillings.

This hurricane will almost cause the ruin of some of the proprietors of
plantations, and perhaps for some time turn their attention with fresh
zeal towards the slave-trade.

Late on the 2nd of April, the hurricane gradually declined in strength,
and then ceased entirely during the night of that day, which saw the last
of the Mammekia or hurricane in these latitudes. This was a calamity
which affected the whole of the province of Mozambique more or less, not
only in its immediate results, but also in those which are to follow.
The slaves themselves told me that now that their masters’ property was
destroyed there was no food for them, and that many would be sent away in
ships, where, or to whom, they did not know. But, alas! I knew but too
well their fated doom.

In the city of Mozambique the Governor-general adopted every precaution,
as soon as the hurricane was over, to maintain order and protect the
property which had been washed on the beach from the wrecks. The
Custom-house was opened to receive the merchandize saved; the military
were posted in different places to maintain order; the dead were
interred to prevent a plague; and in short, despite the great number of
slaves with which the island abounds, there were not many robberies nor
any disorders worth mentioning.




CHAPTER IV.

    The Negro José—Negro Bread—The Promised Sail of Hope—The
    Commander of H. M. B. “Cruizer”—The Consul Supplied with a
    Guard by H. M. Brig—Jealousy of Slave-dealers—Governor-General
    Furnishes a Guard—Consul Renews his Correspondence on the
    Slave-trade—House Attacked and Wife Wounded—Governor-General
    Declares his Inability to Protect the British Consul—Consul
    Embarks on board H. M. S. “Lyra”—Outrage on the Grave of a
    British Subject.


The hurricane described in the last chapter had passed away; the
north-east monsoon had set in, bringing with it the dhows from Cutch,
Bombay, Goâ, and Zanzibar; and the marshy aspect given to the mainland
around our house by the recent rains was somewhat disappearing, when one
of my patients, after assisting me about the house for some few days,
took advantage of a fine cool morning to steal out unobserved, and the
first intimation which I had of his absence was again to hear the sound
of his rifle.

In a few minutes Hilliard made his appearance in the court-yard, bearing
in his hand a fine specimen of the Mozambique crow, jet black from bill
to the tip of the tail, with the exception of a cravat of the purest
white, which makes the bird, when standing on a wall, look uncommonly
like a parson.

For being out before taking his quinine he received an extra dram, and
we then began to talk seriously as to what chance we had of obtaining
any bread. The Portuguese had positively refused to sell me any; and the
Governor-general had written to say that he could not assist me—in fact,
he had written as if there was a famine in the place, to justify his
inhumanity in not assisting me to supply the wants of two Englishwomen
exposed to these slave-trade persecutions.

Among the slaves which I had hired from a Banyan at Mozambique, one of
them, José, had stuck to me through all; and many a time did this poor
negro find his way to the city of Mozambique, and succeed in buying negro
bread for me from the negroes at Mozambique. At first José acted very
honestly; but, latterly, it appears that some of the slaves of Señhor
João da Costa Soares, and others of the slave-dealers, instructed by
their masters, got hold of José on his visits to the city, and, making
him drunk, robbed him of his money. José would, in this way, be absent
at times for some days, but as soon as he became sober the negro would
always turn his face homewards, and he had the good sense not to return
without bread. Sometimes he obtained it on credit, at others he would be
accompanied by the owner of the bread; and as on all these occasions I
took care not to scold the negro too much, and always to pay what he had
promised the negroes who accompanied him from the city, I was never many
days without bread. It is true that this was a very inferior article, and
at all times expensive—costing me as much as three and four dollars for
what might be bought at Mozambique for sixpence, or, at the outside, a
shilling. It is true that this negro bread was generally sour, and at
times blue-mouldy when it reached my house; but Rosa used to cut out the
mouldy parts, and, steeping the remainder for a short time in boiling
hot water, place it in an oven and rebake it, thereby making it at least
eatable. While we were all sick, this miserable supply of bread was
sufficient; but now that Hilliard was recovering, his appetite increased
with his strength, and as there was no bread, nor any substitute, in the
house, I looked very anxiously for the negro on this morning, for he had
been absent more than five days. To apply to our neighbours I knew was
useless, and I was thinking of making my breakfast of the heart of the
head of one of the fallen cocoa-nut trees, when José made his appearance
with enough bread to enable us to hold out for three days longer.

After breakfast, my wife—pale, anxious, and feeble—crawled out of her
room, which she had not left for the last six weeks; and poor Rosa, who
had struggled through it all for so long a time, now that she saw her
mistress about once more, took to her bed, and succumbed to a severe
attack of fever. Every attention was paid to the poor girl who had
behaved so nobly throughout, and for some time we feared that she would
fall a victim, not to the climate, but to the persecutions which we had
endured.

About noon, my wife, on this memorable day, the tenth of April, was
seated in a room of the house set aside for my office, preparing the
skin of the bird which Hilliard had shot in the morning, to be added
to our Mozambique collection; when, having finished my meteorological
observations, I took up the telescope to scan the horizon, as I had
done for so many months, unsuccessful in discovering the promised sail
of hope, when I observed, standing in through the southern channel, a
vessel which, from her rig, I at once knew to be one of the beautiful
Symonite brigs of our navy. Doubting my own senses, I took the glass into
another room to inspect the stranger more leisurely; when I satisfied
myself that I was not mistaken, and that the intelligence might be safely
communicated to my fellow-sufferers. My wife immediately tried to cheer
Rosa with the intelligence, and we all expected that we should hold
communication with our countrymen before evening.

The stranger anchored about two P.M., but, instead of communicating with
the British consul, the commander of the British ship-of-war amused
himself at the billiard-table of the slave-dealer, João da Costa Soares,
and then returned on board of her Majesty’s ship. The next day, Sunday,
this promising officer again repaired to the same society; and on the
following day, after a letter by José from me reaching him, he woke up to
the folly of his conduct, and reached my house, after being at anchor in
the harbour fifty-two hours, at six o’clock in the evening of Monday.

It appears that the captain of the “Castor,” who was senior officer
at the Cape, in the absence of the admiral, to cover his own flagrant
desertion of me, had sent up to Mozambique an officer whose total
incapacity and unfitness for the Mozambique business was too well
known to him. For the credit of the service and of the country, I
have not named even the vessel, commanded by one who is at present on
half-pay, to escape the severe punishment which the total neglect of
the public service had justly merited. While at Mozambique, he was the
constant companion of slave-dealers, contrary to repeated and official
remonstrance, and he must not complain if those who used him as a tool
now express their unmeasured contempt for him—an unenviable reputation,
that of being despised even by slave-dealers.

The morning after the commander visited me I returned his official visit,
and requested him to furnish me with a guard, in order that I might renew
in safety my correspondence with the Governor-general on the subject of
the slave-trade going on in the province, which was conducted by the
officials of all ranks and denominations.

This guard consisted of a corporal and five privates of the Royal
Marines. On the guard reaching my house, I despatched my communications
to the Governor-general, and the next day the slave-dealers represented
to him that the British consul had landed an armed force, preparatory to
taking possession of the country. The commander of the brig-of-war and
myself were called upon to explain our conduct, when the former referred
the Governor-general to me for an answer.

My reply was simply, that “His Excellency had stated, that it was not
in his power to protect me from the fury of the slave-dealers; that for
months, leaving me thus unguarded, he had silenced my remonstrances
against the slave-trade, openly carried on in every port of the Province;
that now a British cruiser had anchored in the port, I had demanded a
guard from her Commander, to enable me to communicate with His Excellency
on the public service.”

The Governor-general talked about an invasion of Portuguese territory;
and told me that, if not satisfied with the treatment I had received, I
was welcome to haul down my Consular flag and retire from the Province.

To which I replied, that having suffered so long in the cause of the
oppressed slaves, it was my intention to obtain some results from the
same—the first of which was, to make His Excellency officially acquainted
with, what I knew well he was aware of, the fearful extent to which the
slave-trade had increased in the last few months. He now called on the
Commander to re-embark the Marines; and on this officer again referring
him to me, the Governor-general told me, “that I was like my country—now,
that I was strong with a British ship-of-war in the harbour, I intended
to trample upon him in his weakness.”

At this outbreak I kept my temper; and when Colonel Almeida recovered
his, he apologized for his rudeness, and begged me, as a favour, to order
the guard to be re-embarked.

On this point I was immovable. He then offered to furnish me with a
Portuguese guard of soldiers, and pledged his honour, as a soldier, that
they should protect me from all insult, if I would re-embark the Marines.
I accepted His Excellency’s offer, and he pledged his word that they
would be at my house before sunset, again repeating his application, that
the Marines would leave my house at once. At last it was arranged, that
the Portuguese guard were to arrive about five o’clock in the afternoon,
and that the English guard would leave the house at the same time. At
the appointed hour, a boat was in waiting from the brig-of-war, but no
Portuguese guard made their appearance; consequently, the English guard
remained in my house that night. Seeing that I was determined on this
point, the next morning the Portuguese guard made their appearance, and
the English guard returned to the brig. Two of the Marines, who had
volunteered to do duty, as servants in the house, were retained, and with
them Hilliard and myself, we were prepared for any treachery on the part
of our convict guard.

Rockets were supplied from the brig to be fired off at night, in the
event of an attack on the Consulate; and I awaited the reply of the
Governor-general to my communications. The first intimation of their
having told was—the Portuguese lady, who had been prevailed upon by Mr.
Duncan, to allow her slaves to wash our linen, declining to accommodate
us for the future. I had pointed out a fact, notorious to every one, that
this lady’s father, Major Olliveira, Governor of Inhambane, was carrying
on the slave-trade, as successfully as his predecessor, the Buccaneer
Leotti; and, because I had done so, I was, according to Portuguese
justice, to go without clean linen.

Dr. Huson, R.N., from the brig, attended on Rosa day and night, with
the most unremitting attention, and his efforts in saving her life were
crowned with success.

The Marines insisted upon washing everything they could lay their hands
upon; but my poor sick wife and her weak maid had again to have recourse
to the washing-tub—there was no help for it—no one in Mozambique would
wash for the Consul’s family.

The brig-of-war had now been lying in the harbour about a month; the
slave-dealers had learned from those who were in daily and hourly
communication with them the signal which I had arranged should be made,
in case of a night attack on the Consulate; and to feel our pulse they
had made a false alarm, which caused the boats of the brig, manned and
armed, to present themselves before my house at one o’clock in the
morning, which resulted in nothing.

A court-martial was at last summoned to try Leotti and the Moor, who
commanded the “Zambesi,” on the occasion of her communicating with the
“Minnetonka,” and these worthies were of course acquitted, being simply
tried for disobedience of orders—not one word in the charge relative
to the “Minnetonka.” In order that this mockery of justice should be
made known in the proper quarter, I asked for a copy of the sentence of
the court in both cases, and in consequence my house was attacked the
same evening. During the time the house was mobbed, and before the lazy
Portuguese guard would turn out, my wife was wounded by a stone thrown
through our bedroom window, which broke a pane of glass, some of which
lodged in her hand. This stoning lasted until the guard fired three times
on those thus engaged; and finding that our gallant protectors, enraged
at having to turn out, were determined to do mischief, the mob withdrew.
The next day the Governor-general made a great fuss, and furnished me
with another guard to patrol around the house. Two officers were sent
over to inquire into the affair; and, although I led them over the
house, and showed them the damage done by the stoning—the broken windows
and damaged exterior of the house—a report was sent to Portugal that
no attack was made on my house. Being prepared for this, I caused the
Portuguese corporal to make to me a statement in writing; likewise the
two marines, and also Charles Hilliard, whose blood was up that night,
when he saw my wife, his gentle nurse, bleeding from the effects of her
wounds. It is satisfactory to know that the British Government was not
imposed upon; for, when a high authority in this country read to me the
Portuguese report, without waiting for any remark from me, he at once
pronounced it an “infernal lie”—very plain and very true.

From the late attack, when protected by the presence of a Portuguese
guard in my house, and that of a British ship of war in the harbour,
it became apparent to what extent the slave-dealers intended to carry
their animosity. To demand satisfaction from the Governor-general for
these insults would have only lowered him still more, where it was the
Anti-Slavery policy clearly to support him and strengthen him against
the slave-dealers. Numbers of the men and officers on board of the brig
were on the sick list from the effects of the climate, and the medical
officer was urging upon the Commander the necessity of proceeding to
sea immediately, when I would have been wholly unprotected, and when the
Governor-general distinctly stated to me that he would not be answerable
for any consequences which might ensue, affirming that he was totally
unable to protect me against the slave-trade party, and that I would be
doing a service to the interest of both my own country and also that
of Portugal by representing his utter inability to protect the consul
of any nation professing anti-slavery principles, until his hands were
strengthened by the Imperial Government of Portugal.

Taking all the circumstances into consideration, after mature
deliberation, it was decided, in consultation with the senior naval
officer, that the best course was to retire to Mauritius, or even
England, until such time as arrangements were made between England and
Portugal for the reception of a British consul, in honour and safety,
to Mozambique. This decision was made known to His Excellency, which he
looked upon as the wiser course, to prevent more serious results than
had already arisen; and, on the 18th of May, I embarked on board H.M.S.
“Lyra,” which had lately joined her consort from the Cape, with my
fellow-sufferers.

The next day we proceeded to sea, and soon lost sight of the city of
Mozambique.

Perhaps of all the melancholy reminiscences of this vile nest of slavery,
the most painful which recurs to my mind is the great indignity offered
to the British nation in the desecration of the grave of one of her most
enterprizing members.

I have already stated that the remains of my lamented friend Duncan were
interred beside those of his countrymen already buried there. The grave
was dug by the express orders of the Governor-general of the Province,
but when Señhor José Vincente de Gama commenced building a tomb over the
remains, in compliance with my earnest request that he would do so, and
charge the expense to me, he was interrupted in this Christian office
by a ruffian named Thomas de Souza Santos, who stated that the ground
belonged to him, and that he would not allow a tomb to be erected over
the remains of the Englishman. When remonstrated with by Señhor de Gama,
he made use of the vilest reproaches at his daring thus to honour the
resting-place of a heretic; and when told that he was only carrying out
the wishes of a countryman of the deceased viz., the British Consul, the
rage of this brute, Santos, became ungovernable. He kicked the stones
from off the sacred spot, and jumped upon the grave of him before whose
living eye his vile and coward heart had often quailed. This insult was
offered to England while a British ship of war was lying in the harbour,
and a British consular flag was flying in the port.

Being further remonstrated with, the wretch threatened De Gama, that
if he addressed another word to him on the subject, he would disinter
the remains of the Englishman, and cast them on the beach—to prevent
which Señhor Gama immediately repaired to me. On my representing matters
officially to the Governor-general, he could only give me an assurance
that the remains of my countryman should not be disturbed; and I was
obliged to content myself with having a cross made on board Her Majesty’s
ship, then in harbour, and having this erected at the head of poor
Duncan’s grave.

The future is unknown to us; but if it should be in my destiny ever
to go to Mozambique again, I hope to be able to erect a monument over
the remains of Duncan, the pioneer of British commercial enterprise
in Eastern Africa, which will at once attest the admiration of his
countrymen and their abhorrence of his persecutors, who would attempt to
carry their contemptible hatred even beyond the tomb.[4]

After the trials of the last five months, it will not be surprising that
the sudden change to shipboard, where all was peace and comfort, was too
much for me. And although I had borne the excitement of this period with
apparent indifference, now that the long struggle was over, the spirit
yielded to the weakness of the body, and before we were many days at
sea I had a severe attack of fever. The blessing of God on the skill of
Dr. Speers, and the unwearied attention of an ever-gentle nurse, soon
brought me round.

Anxious to meet with Dr. Livingstone, whom I expected to fall in with
off the Zambesi, we directed our course to the mouths of that river; and
while approaching the Killimane mouth, we fell in with a dhow, under
Portuguese colours, which we found bound to Mozambique. This vessel,
called the “Flor de Moçambique,” when boarded, was discovered to have on
board a number of boys, who were being doubtless carried to Mozambique
for the purpose of being sold as slaves. The captain of the dhow, who
was a Moor, at first strenuously denied that this was the case; but on
a more diligent search being made, a poor decrepit slave was discovered
headed up in a cask in her hold. On being brought on board the “Lyra,”
and finding himself in safety, he stated, that having been taken in
war, he had been most cruelly treated by the Portuguese, pointing to
various wounds and putrifying sores on his body; that he was now going to
Mozambique, in company with a number of small boys, to be sold as slaves;
and that this system of slave-trade was carried on constantly from
Killimane. The Moor tried to get over this by stating that the slave in
question was a refractory one, belonging to the Government, and that he
was being sent up to Mozambique for punishment by the Governor-general,
as they could do nothing with him at Killimane! I thought that they were
getting mighty particular about negro life, and that this tale differed
considerably from what I had heard at Mozambique was a usual mode of
disposing of refractory slaves throughout the whole Province, viz., tying
them up in a sack and drowning them.

The ship’s papers were produced, and on them were a number of fictitious
names; the Moor wished the boys to answer to these names, but the
imposition was too gross to be allowed to pass. Boys of seven, eight, and
nine years, were required to pass muster for persons of thirty and forty
years, whose names they had never heard before!

At this stage of the proceeding the Commander of the “Lyra” asked my
opinion of matters, and I told him that she appeared to be one of the
numerous dhows employed along the coast feeding the slave-trade, by
collecting them from distant parts, and so obtaining cargoes for the
large slavers from America and Cuba.

I told the Moor that I was the British Consul for Mozambique, and that
he had better make a clean breast of it. The Moor then stated that,
previous to leaving Killimane, the Governor of that place had sent
twenty-two slaves on board, to be delivered to his owner at Mozambique.
He remonstrated with the Governor of Killimane, and told him that,
since they had a British Consul at Mozambique, the English stopped
all slave-trade. That when at sea he was sure to meet with an English
man-of-war, and when the Captain of the man-of-war found he had slaves on
board he would seize the dhow. That to make his mind easy on this point,
the Governor of Mozambique added what he thought a sufficient number of
names to the list of his crew, so that no English man-of-war would seize
the dhow. He admitted that these slaves were, with some others which
were to follow, a portion of a cargo for a slaver; and stated that the
owner of the dhow was the Collector of the Customs at Mozambique, and the
uncle of João da Costa Soares, the notorious French Free Labour Agent at
Mozambique. Commander Oldfield at once decided upon seizing this slave
dhow. The crew were subsequently landed at the Bazarutto Islands; the
captain and slaves conveyed to Natal, where we were bound, and the vessel
set on fire.

Commander Oldfield, acting on information which I supplied to him,
after landing me at Mauritius, on his return to the Mozambique Channel,
captured sixteen dhows engaged in the slave-trade, showing what one
energetic officer, having the public service at heart, could do in the
Mozambique Channel, while his senior officer, playing at billiards, kept
his vessel at anchor in that harbour. These are facts which ought to be
inquired into, and the zealous officer should obtain his well-earned
promotion.

Although we were twenty-four hours off the Luavo mouths of the Zambesi,
we could not obtain any response to the guns which we fired, to make
known the presence of the “Lyra” to the “Hermes,” which we had heard was
anchored off one of the mouths; and although greatly disappointed in not
meeting with the expedition, we were compelled to hurry on to Natal.

There we learned that there was no hope of overtaking the mail to the
Cape of Good Hope, and, after landing the faithful Rosa (who was there
among many friends), the survivors of the “Herald,” whom I had brought
with me from Mozambique, and the slaves from the captured dhow, with a
Lieutenant in charge of them, to the Mixed Commission Court at Cape Town,
we proceeded to Port Louis, Mauritius, where I immediately forwarded a
telegram, through Her Majesty’s Consul-general in Egypt, apprising the
Government of my arrival at Mauritius, and desire to proceed to England,
as soon as sufficiently recovered, for the journey home.




CHAPTER V.

    Mauritius—The Introduction of Labour from India—Machinery
    and Guano—Population—Revenue Exceeds the Expenditure
    Considerably—Immigration Crimps—Coloured Ball—The Key to
    India—The Governor of Réunion offers to Garrison “the Isle
    of France”—Port Louis—Two Bishops—Bad Hôtels—“Dieu et Mon
    Droit”—“Trumpeters before Travellers”—“There, you Poor
    Devil!”—The Colonel’s Wedding-day—British Barque “Sutton” Opens
    a New Description of Slave-Trade—The Gallant Affair of the
    “Sarah Sands.”


The history of the Island of Mauritius, or—as the French will insist
upon calling it—the Isle of France, is too well known to be even briefly
alluded to here. But as this island, from its position in the Indian
Ocean, has been hitherto looked upon as the key, or stepping-stone, to
our possessions in the East, a short statement of its present state
may not be unacceptable to the general reader; more especially as this
island, together with that of Barbadoes, are the two great striking
examples of the success of the British emancipation of the slaves, when
followed up by an adequate supply of free labour.

The cessation of the apprenticeship of the former slaves took place in
April, 1839; but as the abolition of slavery had been proclaimed four
years previous, and many of the apprentices obtained by purchase, or
otherwise, their complete liberty, the colonists began to replace them
by the introduction of natives from India. The Government offered no
obstacle to this introduction of labourers; there was no restriction as
to the number to be carried in each vessel, and from 1834 to 1838, 24,566
of the natives of India were introduced into the island of Mauritius.

These labourers engaged to work at field labour for a term of five years,
at the rate of five rupees per month; and a certain amount, it appears,
was retained out of their wages to provide a passage back to India, if
they wished, at the expiration of their engagement.

From the facility with which labour was obtained from India, the
newly-emancipated labourers were entirely neglected; and if the
Government had not checked this supply of labour, the wise and beneficent
intentions of the British Legislature, in responding to the call of the
nation, and emancipating the slaves throughout our colonies, would here
have been entirely frustrated, and the godlike boon of liberty would only
have been the precursor to a miserable death by famine.

The want of control in the shipment of these immigrants in the Indian
ports led to abuse; for vessels took a much larger amount of persons than
they had room for on board, and the natural consequence was that disease
was created on board of the vessels, and numbers of the coolies perished
on the voyage to this El Dorado of the native of India.

At this time the Imperial Government and the Government of India wisely
stepped in, and for a time stopped a system of immigration which
at that time was creating a great amount of suffering, both to the
lately-emancipated negro, and also to the native of India endeavouring
to better his condition by proceeding to the Mauritius.

But on its being fairly shown that the ex-apprentices could not be
brought back to field labour—which they looked upon as a mark of that
abject slavery from which they had just been released, and that their
labour found employment in other channels, the Imperial Government,
after having stopped this labour for four years, namely from 1838 to
1842—removed the prohibition on the introduction of Indians. During this
prohibition, the staple product of the island, viz., sugar, declined from
39,559 tons in 1840 to 36,542 tons in 1842.

Since the prohibition of the introduction of Indian labourers in 1842 was
removed, the produce of agricultural industry in this colony has been
regular and rapid, the increase of the productions of the soil being in
proportion to the introduction of labourers as follows:—

    Year.   No. of Indians in the Colony.   Sugar Exported.
              Males.         Females.            lbs.

    1842      18,105            888          73,082,177
    1857     107,072         35,452         229,321,468

and also in nearly the same proportion during the intermediate years.

Mauritius has suffered from more than one crisis in the money-market
during the last twenty years, which may be fairly traced to the cessation
of immigration from 1838 to 1843, as well as to the modification and
equalization of the duties on foreign sugar, in 1842 and 1846. The last
crisis, that of 1847-8, proved so violent as to completely annihilate
some houses connected with large London firms, who had been led to
advance considerable sums of money in the hope of eventually obtaining
returns from the estates they were supporting. Since this last crisis
there has been less speculation, and estates are said to have been
managed with more economy than formerly. I was told that they are now
better cultivated, and, from the introduction of superior machinery, the
manufacture of sugar is more economical.

The introduction of guano has done wonders for this island; for by the
use of it in the wet districts, where the soil is of a cold clayey
nature, land formerly deemed unfitted for the culture of the sugar-cane
has become some of the most fertile in the island.

The increase of production and consumption, added to the large
immigration of native labour from India, has given employment to an
increased number of shipping; while the repeal of the navigation laws
in 1850 threw the ports of this small colony open to the vessels of all
nations.

In 1857, the population of the island amounted to 239,007 persons,
consisting of:—

    General population      55,794
    Ex-Apprentice ditto     40,678
    Immigrant ditto        142,534

Taxes have lately been much reduced; but the extending trade, larger
production, and increasing population and wealth have raised the revenue
of this thriving colony far beyond the expenditure.

The large amount of 79,500_l._ sterling is annually expended on
immigration, while every means are taken to see the immigrant properly
protected. In consequence of the competition among the planters for
labour, a system of crimpage existed at Mauritius, when I visited that
island, which was injurious to the best interests of the immigrant and
his employer; the middle-men or crimps, who obtained the labourers on
their arrival in the island, being the only parties benefited. While
the expense of importing a labourer from India has cost a planter 6_l._
for the passage-money of the immigrant, I have known instances in which
he was obliged to pay the crimp an additional 6_l._ to secure the
immigrant—which, together with a further expense of 2_l._ for government
fees, made each labourer placed on the estate, before he began to work,
cost 14_l._

By recent regulations enabling the planter to engage the immigrant in
India, and making that engagement binding on their arrival at Mauritius,
the crimpage system will now be done away with.

With regard to the treatment of the blacks, natives of India, or
ex-apprentices, nothing could be more liberal, nor could freedom be more
perfect than that which they enjoy.

I have been in many mixed communities, and have seen the black in Cuba,
Jamaica, and all the other West India Islands, in Sierra Leone, Liberia,
and Mozambique, but I have never seen him enjoying a better position in
the social circle than at Mauritius.

Soon after our arrival at Port Louis, we were invited to a coloured ball,
at which the Governor and principal ladies of the island were guests;
the dresses of the ladies, for beauty or costliness, could not have been
surpassed in Paris or London; while the ceremonies of the ball-room and
supper-table were conducted with the utmost decorum and grace.

The employers being so much at the mercy of the employed, the labouring
classes are insolent in the extreme; and any amount of wealth does not
secure the more opulent portion of the community from suffering from a
want which no amount of money can purchase.

In the towns and on the plantations everywhere one hears the same
complaint—the bad conduct of the servants. Coolies from Madras and
Calcutta, who really are good servants, after a few months’ residence on
the island, become lazy, insolent, and drunkards.

For the coloured population, the rate of wages is a great deal too high;
the consequence is that the majority spend their abundance in drink,
and, when under the influence of this, much mischief, and crimes of a
minor description, are committed. The Government of the island is, in
a great measure, answerable for this, for the number of small drinking
places which they license throughout the island. Every plantation has the
curse of one or more small drinking place, just beyond the limits of the
grounds, where the labourers betake themselves at any hour, and absent
themselves from their work for any time they please.

For this conduct, on the part of the labourer, the employer has little or
no redress; as, if he punishes the coolie, he loses his services while
imprisoned, and the period of engagement is progressing, just as if he
were engaged in the field instead of the prison.

If those labourers who are committed to prison were usefully employed
in improving the roads, which in general are bad, a wholesome dread of
prison discipline would be instilled, which, in a short time, would have
a beneficial effect on the labouring community.

The great obstacle to the suppression of these small drinking shops is
the large revenue which their licences bring in to the Government. This
is one of the causes of the revenue so far exceeding the expenditure;
and this unhealthy state of prosperity, based on the immorality and
demoralization of the masses, must, sooner or later, bring a destructive
change, leading to the most serious results.

The Indian population, already overpaid and demoralized by the excessive
use of intoxicating liquors, if thrown out of employment by two
successive years of failure of the sugar-cane—the staple product of the
island—and the consequent ruin of many of the planters, deprived of the
means of living, and excited by the intoxicating drinks which have now
become habitual to them, would commit the most frightful excesses, and
incalculable injury might be inflicted on the interests of the colony ere
the Executive could be sufficiently strengthened to check these excesses.

From its position in the Indian Ocean, this island should always have a
reserve of at least 10,000 men, who would be acclimatized for our eastern
possessions, and form a force at all times available for service, from
Bombay to our furthest eastern possession, while its proximity to the
Cape of Good Hope, Natal, and Aden, would afford our garrisons in those
parts ready aid, in case of a sudden outbreak among the natives of Africa
or Arabia.

At the neighbouring French island of Réunion, formerly called Bourbon,
there is always a large force, evidently with the view of being useful
in those seas in the case of any sudden emergency. This force consists
of five regiments, each 800 strong, and a municipal force of about 1,600
men, making in all about 6,000 men, within one night’s steaming distance
of this little gem of the Indian Ocean; while the island of Mauritius
has been left without more than four small companies of one regiment to
protect it.

I know from the best authority that, when the Indian mutiny broke out,
the kind-hearted and polite Governor of Réunion, evidently desirous to
carry out the _entente cordiale_ existing between the two nations to its
fullest extent, offered to garrison the Isle of France, or, as we call
it, Mauritius, with French troops; but with many thanks his generous
offer was politely declined, although, I believe, we had not 400 fighting
men on the island—while there were nearly 6,000 Frenchmen longing for a
glorious _coup d’état_, within ten or twelve hours steaming distance from
our “key to India.”

The island of Mauritius presents the most diversified and beautiful
scenery throughout, being everywhere in a high state of cultivation. From
the moment of its being seen from the deck of a ship on the Indian Ocean,
until it fades away in the distance, it presents one continued view of
rich vegetation. Many of the planters’ seats are luxurious abodes; and
all those having English for their owners, or residents, may be known by
that air of comfort which accompanies an English home in every quarter of
the globe.

The principal city is Port Louis, which is beautifully situated in the
centre of a snug harbour, having in its rear an amphitheatre of hills,
which inclose a space where the races and reviews take place. The town is
a mixture of houses built in the English and French styles, and, being
situated principally on a steep incline, might, if properly drained,
be one of the healthiest spots in the world; but, in consequence of the
neglect of this necessary precaution in that climate, the inhabitants
suffer greatly when cholera invades the island, in spite of the admirable
quarantine regulations established there. There are two cathedrals and
two bishops, for the Protestant and Roman Catholic religions. Dr. Ryan,
the Lord Bishop of Mauritius, is indefatigable in “all good works,” and
already his labours have produced their good fruits, by the awakening
of the Protestant community to what may, from all statements, be really
called “a new life.”

With the surplus revenue of this colony, for more than twenty years
of almost uninterrupted prosperity, one is surprised to find no great
buildings, the general mark of social progress. In all the Roman colonies
these marks of their ameliorating influence were found; but here, as in
many other British colonies, there are no monuments to mark the dominion
of a mighty nation. People at the Mauritius appear bent upon making
money, and then returning to Europe—few looking upon it as their abiding
place.

The island keeps pace with modern improvements, in machinery especially;
and preparations are making for the establishment of a railway, which
will lead to the further development of this fruitful little island.

The hotels are the worst managed establishments I have ever seen;
firstly, because the proprietors are all above their business, driving
in equipages which outvie those of the Governor and principal planters;
and, secondly, because the law between employer and employed is not
sufficiently binding, and consequently the hotel proprietors have no
control over their servants.

In the Hôtel d’Europe, I have known every one in the house waiting for
breakfast, while all the waiters were employed in polishing up the
harness for the horses of the splendid carriage of the proprietor, which
bore on the panel the armorial bearings of a noble English family,
without the bend of bastardy, to which the owner was alone entitled;
while, surmounting the arms, there was the representation of a cockatoo
fluttering, with a ribbon in its mouth, on which was the royal motto,
“_Dieu et mon droit!_”

On another occasion, wishing to have breakfast previous to going to
church on Sunday morning, the boarders in this hotel requested to know
the cause of delay, and they were told that a party of gentlemen were
engaged in breakfasting in the public room, and that the boarders who
supported the house could not breakfast until the gentlemen had finished.
In company with a naval friend, I ventured to intrude on the privacy
of the strangers, when we were presented with the sight of the German
brass band—they, their wives, and their little ones—belonging to this
fashionable hotel, at breakfast. Being a traveller, and from time to
time seeing various strange scenes, I observed to my friend that this
was doubtless “the custom of the country.” To which he replied that
in that little island “trumpeters evidently came before travellers.”
Remonstrance was quite useless; so, after the Germans had finished their
“sauer-kraut,” we, who supported them, were allowed to eat off the same
table.

After the excitement of arriving at Port Louis had somewhat worn off,
my wife and myself were very ill, and confined to our room, with low
nervous fever from the effects of the Mozambique affair. During this
time we should certainly have fared very badly, if it had not been for
the widow of a naval officer and her daughter, Mrs. Russell, who were
unremitting in their kind attentions to us—even bringing nice nourishing
soup from their own house for us, it being quite impossible to obtain
anything, even a drop of water when one was sick, from those in the
hotel, although we were paying very handsomely.

The whole of the first floor was originally intended for a large
ball-room; and so as not to interfere with this design (for which it
is sometimes required, when the guests have to go without beds), it
is partitioned off into small apartments, barely large enough to hold
a small iron bed and wash-hand stand. The wooden partitions dividing
these spaces into apartments are about ten feet in height, there being a
space between them and the ceiling of some six or seven feet—so that one
may hear everything going on over the whole floor. In fact, the wooden
partitions simply acted as screens to divide one bed from the other.

The usual mode of calling the servants at table was by dropping a
tumbler on the marble floor, which, breaking in pieces, had the effect
of drawing the attention of the proprietor of the arms surmounted with a
fluttering cockatoo, who immediately made his appearance to look after
his motto—“_Dieu et mon droit._”

In this first-rate hotel, with its brass band and flaming advertisements
in the local papers, I have seen people, on returning to the hotel after
spending the evening at some family party, obliged to find the way to
their room by means of a candle stuck in a black bottle, which had been
lighted by a match supplied by the driver of the coach which brought
them to the door of the hotel—every servant remaining in the house being
insensibly drunk.

After recovering from our short attack of illness, we removed to an
adjoining hotel just opened, where we could procure decent apartments,
but nothing to eat. We had therefore to make arrangements with another
hotel for our meals—but they would not undertake to send the meals, as
the servants were so bad they could not depend on them bringing the
things as required. On the other hand, they had no rooms vacant. I was
therefore obliged to hire a Madras coolie, named “Sammy,” to act as
“butler,” as he styled it.

On arriving at the second hotel, one of the servants lifted out of the
carriage a bird-cage, and carried it up to my room, for which he demanded
payment.

Tired, ill, and worried, in the hope of getting rid of his importunity,
I put my hand into my pocket and reached him a shilling, not having any
smaller change about me at the time. Looking very hard at the shilling,
which was lying on the palm of his hand, he backed to what he considered
a safe distance, and then the “poor black” asked me if “I called myself a
gentleman in offering him a shilling?” Without waiting for my answer, he
slapped his leg to make the money in his pocket jingle, and then putting
his hand into his pocket he pulled out a shilling, which, adding to the
one I had given to him, he threw at my feet, and exclaiming, “There, you
poor devil!” he walked off.

Sammy, after the first day, acted fool—and he did it admirably—but the
only way was to keep one’s temper, and patience generally conquered.

My wife’s appetite and my own were exceedingly small, but still we found
what the hotel sent us for dinner was less than we could fairly manage.
I asked our host to add another dish, but yet there seemed to be a small
supply.

One day I observed Sammy enter the hotel with our dinner on his head, and
thinking he took a very long time coming from the hall door to my room,
I went in search of my “butler.” I found him in an adjoining room with
the dinner spread out on the floor, and in deep consultation with another
“poor black,” as to how much more they ought to remove from the dishes
before “butler” laid dinner before his master. I had the dinner restored
to the dishes, and on that occasion I found that the hotel-keeper
furnished much more than was necessary.

These anecdotes are necessary to show what I really saw, and how much the
“poor blacks” have the upper hand at Mauritius.

All ranks are entirely at the mercy of their servants, as the following
account of what occurred in an officer’s family will illustrate.

Colonel B. was celebrated for giving good dinners; and Mrs. B. used to
smile at the different tales which she heard of the servants in the
island.

She was in the habit of humouring the servants; and although they used
occasionally to absent themselves for days, and the colonel and his lady,
on returning from church on Sunday, have had to dine on cheese and bread,
as the butler was quite drunk under the dining-room table, and the cook
had fortified himself in the kitchen, threatening to run anyone through
who dared to invade his dominions—still Mrs. Colonel B. said “that these
‘poor blacks,’ had gratitude; for whenever they had a dinner-party they
never behaved badly.”

The colonel’s charming dinner-parties had an end, from the circumstances
arising out of the keeping up of their wedding-day. A nice party of
guests were invited, and everything went like a marriage feast, until
shortly before dinner, when the colonel’s dress boots were not to be
found anywhere. Better had he not troubled himself further about the said
boots. The butler was sent for, and he said he knew nothing about the
cause of the absence of the boots. Mrs. B. was appealed to, and she could
give no information. And the colonel at last told the butler that he
would make him pay for the missing boots.

Blackey immediately got saucy, and the colonel gave him a whipping. The
guests were arriving, the colonel hurried to meet them, and the boots
were forgotten.

Dinner was announced, and the party were ushered into the dining-room.
Soup and fish were served—and there was a considerable pause. The room
being left without a single attendant, Mrs. B. rose and retired to see
what was the cause of the delay. Along the passages, in the verandah, and
on the way to the kitchen, which was some distance from the house, she
met with no one. On entering the kitchen she found that also deserted.
She called, but no one answered.

Looking round for the dinner, she observed all the dishes standing on a
table, placed there for the purpose of serving the dinner up, preparatory
to taking it to the dining-room, and in the centre stood the colonel’s
boots which had been missing that day. In each boot she found a roasted
duck had been thrust, and over them the sweet sauce for pudding had been
poured.

The turkey was there, but it was garnished with cinders, and, in short,
a beautiful dinner was completely spoiled. At the sight of which poor
Mrs. B. fainted away. The colonel, soon afterwards making his appearance,
found his wife insensible, and his dinner ruined.

The above is a well-known story, and I could enumerate many more, but I
fear the reader’s patience is already well nigh exhausted.

From the law there is but little redress, for, when one imprisons
servants for punishment, the time, I was told, counts in the period of
their servitude. And if one takes the law into his own hand, by striking
the natives, a severe pecuniary penalty is, very properly, always
inflicted.

During my stay at Mauritius, my attention was called to the following
gross outrage committed under the British flag by an inhuman monster,
who, calling himself an Englishman, proceeds to distant parts of the
world, and, seizing unoffending natives in the most open manner, sells
them from under the British ensign into the most hopeless slavery.

In the month of August, 1857, the British barque “Sutton,” of Sydney, New
South Wales, under the command of Captain Joseph Wilson, called at Byron
Island, one of the King Mill group in the Pacific, and engaged William
Ferrier, an Englishman, who, with his family, had resided on that island
for more than sixteen years, as an interpreter, for the purpose, as
Captain Wilson stated, of enabling the barque “Sutton” to obtain a cargo
of cocoa-nuts from the neighbouring islands.

With Ferrier six of the natives of Byron Island were embarked on board
the “Sutton,” who formed the crew of his canoe; and the barque bore away
in search of cocoa-nuts—Captain Wilson agreeing to reland Ferrier and
his crew of natives on Byron Island as soon as he had effected his object
at the neighbouring islands.

At Perouse and Clarke Islands, Captain Wilson, with the assistance of the
interpreter Ferrier, induced sixty-five male natives to ship themselves
on board the “Sutton,” for the purpose of gathering cocoa-nuts, and with
the understanding that when he had accomplished this object the natives
would be relanded on the respective islands to which they belonged.

The King Mill group of islands are much frequented by whalers, more
especially those under the American flag. The natives are very peaceably
inclined towards Europeans; and these whaling vessels derive great
benefit from their crews being refreshed at these islands with supplies
of vegetables, fruit, &c., so necessary to prevent the fearful havoc
at times made among the men by the attacks of scurvy to which they are
subject, from their voyages being sometimes protracted even beyond three
years. It is, therefore, the policy of all shipmasters to treat the
natives on these islands with kindness, and hence the outrage which I am
now relating assumes even a more serious aspect than when merely viewing
it in an anti-slavery light.

Captain Joseph Wilson had heard of free labourers being in great demand
at the French island of Réunion; and, as the means by which this
description of labour was supplied from the province of Mozambique was
notorious, being styled everywhere “The French Slave-trade from Africa,”
he thought he would try his hand at it, and hit upon the above mode of
obtaining the raw material cheap. The reader will observe that he did not
overcrowd the ship—he only took sixty-five of the natives on board, for
the purpose of selling them; and to obtain a good price he was determined
to have them in good condition, and therefore gave them ample space
during their confinement on the long voyage he contemplated.

Having obtained his living cargo, he turned his face to the west in
search of a good market, and day and night the British barque “Sutton,”
with her cargo of slaves, was urged, under a press of canvas, to the
desired haven.

Captain Joseph Wilson, commanding the “Sutton,” was a bold man, for the
first land he made was the island of Mauritius; and he stood boldly for
the principal harbour in the island, viz., Port Louis; arrived off which
he hove-to, and waited for the shades of evening. I carefully searched
the list of all vessels boarded by the authorities of Port Louis in the
month of November, 1857, when the “Sutton” was off the harbour, but
her name does not appear in the list, showing that she did not come
sufficiently near to the entrance of the harbour to be visited by the
boarding officer. During the night on which the “Sutton” was hove-to off
Port Louis, Captain Wilson communicated with a mercantile house in that
town; and at dawn, the following day, he stood away for the neighbouring
French island of Réunion.

The British bark “Sutton,” which could not obtain a market for her living
cargo at Mauritius, with the English ensign flying at her peak, anchored
boldly off the island of Réunion, and sold her cargo at 40_l._ sterling
per head, realizing the sum of 2,600_l._

Captain Joseph Wilson also found a market for his vessel, and sold
the “Sutton” for 1,600_l._ sterling. Whether the ship was as much his
property as the natives of Byron Island whom he had stolen and sold,
I know not, but it appears that he left Réunion with 4,200_l._, and
repaired to Port Louis, Mauritius.

Captain Wilson was accompanied to the Mauritius by William Henry Meadows,
an American citizen, William Ferrier, and, I believe, four of the natives
forming the crew of Ferrier’s canoe.

Meadows, as far as I recollect, was the mate of the “Sutton,” and he was
obliged to appeal to the American consuls to make Captain Wilson provide
a passage for him and the four natives of Byron Island to Sydney. The
American consul refusing to interest himself for William Ferrier, who was
an Englishman, application was made to His Excellency the Governor of
Mauritius, to provide a passage for the unfortunate man to Sydney, from
which port it was expected the authorities would forward him to Byron
Island. The man Ferrier was at Port Louis during my stay there, and I saw
him on two occasions.

I have heard that a prosecution, instituted by the authorities at Sydney,
against Captain Joseph Wilson, of the late British barque “Sutton,”
failed, from some cause with which I am unacquainted, and that this
affair has caused much indignation at Sydney.

In the Mercantile Marine List there are four master-mariners holding
certificates under the name of Joseph Wilson; but having been informed
that there was no difficulty in identifying the person referred to as the
perpetrator of the above outrage, so degrading to our national character,
and that he was in England some months since, I did what I conceived was
my duty to the cause of humanity by dragging this thief to justice; and
if he has not received that punishment which he so richly deserves, it is
from no dereliction of duty on my part.

From the perusal of such a perfidious act it is a pleasant relief to
turn to that of one of the noblest deeds of the many which have been
performed by the mercantile marine of Great Britain. While at Port Louis
I had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of Captain Castle, of the
“Sarah Sands;” and as my wife had seen that vessel on her first visit to
the United States, where she was gazed upon at that time as a prodigy of
marine construction, we made up a small party to visit the wreck of this
once noble ship.

We found her lying in the inner harbour; and, looking at her hull, one
would never expect to see the ruin which a view from the remaining
portions of her deck presented to the astonished spectators. This
vessel was bound with troops to India, and when about 200 miles off the
island of Mauritius she was reported to be on fire. Immediately the
usual measures for overcoming this frightful calamity were resorted
to by those on board. Large supplies of water were furnished from all
parts of the ship to destroy the destroyer; but it was found that the
fire was too powerful for the rival element, and that it was closely
adjoining a considerable portion of powder, which was stowed away in the
after-compartment of the vessel.

The cool commanding mind of Captain Castle was equal to the emergency;
and well did he prove himself deserving of the command of one of the
finest vessels in our mercantile navy. Order was maintained throughout;
and to the exertions of the noble crew of the “Sarah Sands,” led by their
gallant commander, and seconded by the admirable discipline of the troops
on board, the safety of all may unquestionably be attributed.

Finding that the raging element had obtained possession of the after-part
of the vessel, the boats were carefully lowered, and the ladies, women,
and children placed in them. An officer of the ship was despatched in
command of the boats, with orders to keep them at a distance—so that, if
the vessel blew up, those in the boats would be uninjured.

In the meanwhile, the most daring spirits on board, regardless of the
suffocating smoke and the scorching flames, boldly approached the powder,
and dragged it up through the raging element, package after package, to
be cast into the sea. Blackened and speechless, these brave men were
dragged up from the hold of the vessel by the ropes which they had
secured round their bodies before descending—although insensible from
the heat, still holding in their grasp the kegs of powder. These were
succeeded by others as daring, who, on being dragged on deck, were again
relieved by their predecessors, whose recovery was effected by dashing
water over them. While this fearful struggle of the most daring valour
with death was taking place, the hose were playing upon the raging fire,
and rafts were being constructed on each side of the ship, for the
purpose of saving at least a portion of the apparently doomed band.

The ship was built of iron, and fortunately in compartments. The fire had
arisen in the after-compartment, and the most incredible exertions were
made to confine it there. The decks were ripped up and sawed across to
prevent the fire spreading; further forward, across the deck, partitions
were formed of wet blankets, which, being deluged with water, prevented
the fire spreading. At last the fire, in spite of superhuman efforts,
obtained the upper hand; the flames soared high into the heavens, and as
they overcame all human efforts, the cry of anguish might be heard from
the passive spectators in the boats. Imploring voices asked for the boats
to approach the burning ship, in the hope of saving some loved ones among
that doomed band; but the young officer in command, even in that trying
hour, obeyed the orders which he had received from his chief, and kept
the boats at a safe distance.

At last those grown reckless by their former success in obtaining the
coveted kegs of powder had to be held forcibly back from flinging
themselves into the flames, in the hope of obtaining the few remaining
kegs, and thereby saving the ship from the impending destruction. In this
noble rivalry a quarter-master belonging to the crew, and a sergeant of
the regiment embarked, were the most conspicuous.

Some portion of the powder yet remained in the after-compartment, and
over it the flames enjoyed their dance of death; high up they soared,
licking the top-mast shrouds, and encircling the mizen-mast with ropes of
fire.

The boom, the gaff, the deck, all had disappeared, and ever and anon, as
the ship rolled from side to side, and the flames leaped to starboard or
to port, the iron beams which had formerly supported the decks were seen
of a fiery red, forming an awful lattice-work, through which the burning
element raged with its fearful roar. At last the beams began to bend
with their own weight, and the pressure of the sea on the sides of the
vessel. The rafts were rapidly building; but moments were felt by all as
days. Meanwhile the smoke rose dark and lowering into the heavens, making
the sky even look fiery, and forming a beacon far and near on the Indian
Ocean. From the foremast head the horizon was anxiously scanned, but no
telescope on board could bring to the eye the promised “sail of hope.”

The awful hour was fast approaching when life or death would be
pronounced for those on board that ship. The powder pent up in that fiery
cavern must soon ignite, and, bursting through the ship’s sides, let in
the sea either to save or engulph them.

At last the moment came—the explosion took place—and hearts which never
quailed before for an instant ceased to beat.

The mighty ship reeled and staggered like a drunken man; the waves
surged high and rushed upon her; the raging fire yelled and hissed, and
roared again. Then all was still—a cloud of steam marking where the
fire had been. That awful silence was broken by the captain’s voice
exclaiming:—“Thanks be to God, she’s saved!” But, before the fervent
“Amens” had reached him, again was heard his resolute tone of command to
“man the pumps!”

Again was hope deferred. The ship was sinking fast! It was perceptible
to all. Down—down—she was gradually settling—there was no mistaking the
feeling!

The excitement of another struggle with the element which had destroyed
the fire now took place. The pumps were manned, and buckets, tubs,
everything was used to bale out the water.

Captain Castle, always collected, soon found that one quarter was blown
out of the ship, while the stern and the other quarter still held
together. He rapidly formed a temporary breakwater of plank and canvas,
to keep out the body of the sea; then hooking relieving tackles on
the rudder outside of the ship (for the tiller and head of the rudder
were burnt away), he manœuvred his vessel, which was under steam, until
he got her in such a position that the injured portion of the vessel
was sheltered from the violence of the sea. He then built a temporary
bulkhead, and with the pumps going night and day, he brought the “Sarah
Sands,” without a compass, sextant, or chronometer, into Port Louis, a
distance of two hundred miles from that spot on the Indian Ocean where
this disaster originated.

The officers and their families lost everything; and indeed the ladies
landed at Mauritius in canvas dresses made by them out of the ship’s
stores. The hospitable reception afforded to all on board the “Sarah
Sands” by the people of Mauritius can never be forgotten by the grateful
recipients; while the memory of Captain Castle, his coolness and courage,
will be the theme of admiration wherever the name of the “Sarah Sands” is
heard. And yet—must I write it?—no reward has been conferred on him for
saving a regiment which afterwards did such gallant service in India,
and contributed to the saving of our Eastern Empire.




CHAPTER VI.

    France and Madagascar—Radama, Sovereign of the whole
    Island—Mayotte, the French Gibraltar—Nossi-bé and Hell
    Town—Holy Fathers in St. Augustine Bay—Malagasy Children
    taken to Réunion and educated by the Jesuits—Recent Attempt
    of the French to Revolutionize Madagascar—M. Lambert—Madam
    Ida Pfeiffer—Père Jean—Laborde—The Plot thickens—The Queen
    discovers all—The Conspirators banished from the Island—Death
    of Ida Pfeiffer—Products—Means proposed for securing the
    Independence of Madagascar.


At Mauritius, the neighbouring island of Madagascar is a constant subject
of interest, dependent, as that island and Réunion are, upon Madagascar
for supplies of cattle, rice, &c.

Its history has already been made known to us by the Reverend William
Ellis, while the more recent work of that talented and adventurous
missionary has made us more intimately acquainted with the present social
state of that island.

To France this island has been an object of desire ever since the days
of Cardinal Richelieu, who, foreseeing the important position which the
island must eventually hold in commanding the commerce of the East, in
the Indian Ocean, both by way of the Cape of Good Hope, and also by the
Red Sea, granted, about two hundred and fifty years ago, to a company
of merchants the right of trading with Madagascar, evidently with the
intention of eventually obtaining possession of that island for the crown
of France.

Jean Baptiste Colbert also, the great financial minister of Louis
XIV., to whom France owes so much of her greatness, appointed a
Governor-general for this new dependency, which it was hoped in the
course of time would form a large and successful colony of France in
these seas; and went so far as to give to it the “_beautiful_” name of
Eastern France.

The Governor-general carried out with him the grand seal of Eastern
France.

This seal represented the King in his royal robes, the crown on his head,
the sceptre in one hand, and the scales of justice in the other; around
the seal was the following inscription:—

“Ludovici XIV. Franciæ et Navarræ Regis Sigillum ad usum supremi consilii
Galliæ Orientalis.”

But the company founded by Colbert, like that set on foot by Richelieu,
became bankrupt from mismanagement and the personal animosities of those
sent out to Madagascar.

The only period at which France has ever had a shadow of a chance of
obtaining the sovereignty of this magnificent island—which from its
commanding position is deservedly called the Great Britain of Africa—was
when the French settlements were under the command of the mastermind
of the Count Benyowski, one of the magnates of the kingdom of Hungary
and Poland, who, after escaping from a Russian prison in Kamtschatka,
took service in that of the King of France; and being appointed to
the government of the French settlements in Madagascar, by his tact,
perseverance, and energy, obtained the confidence of the natives. But the
French authorities, envious of his great glory, eventually destroyed him.

After the fall of the noble but unfortunate Benyowski, and the
abandonment of the different settlements which he had formed, France
only held a few ports on the east coast of Madagascar, for the purposes
of commerce, which were under the direction of a commercial agent, and
protected by a military detachment furnished by the Isle of France,
now called Mauritius. These factories were kept up for the purpose of
provisioning the isles of France and Bourbon (Réunion), and affording
supplies to the French squadrons occupying the Indian Ocean. At last, in
1810, they were confined to two—namely, Tamatave and Foulpointe.

In that year the Isles of France and Bourbon were taken possession of by
the English, and the French settlements on the east coast of Madagascar
shared the fate of those islands; and on the 18th of February, 1811, they
capitulated to Captain Lynn, R.N., commanding his Britannic Majesty’s
corvette “L’Eclipsé”—M. Sylvian Roux having signed the capitulation as
French Agent-General.

After the capitulation, the fort at Tamatave was occupied by a detachment
of British soldiers, under the command of Captain Wilson, of the 22nd
Grenadiers, who reported that event in a communication to the government
of Mauritius, dated Tamatave, 27th February, 1811. Foulpointe, which was
a dependency of the settlement at Tamatave, with a subordinate French
agent, also surrendered, and was taken possession of by the English.
These portions of the coast were under the government of native princes,
to whom M. Sylvian Roux had been accredited by the French government of
the isle of France, now Mauritius, as agent or superintendent of trade,
and the fort at Tamatave was for the protection of French trade.

This capture was ratified by the Definitive Treaty, signed at Paris on
the 30th of May, 1814, ceding these settlements on the east coast of
Madagascar to Great Britain, as one of the dependencies of the Isle of
France or Mauritius; and again, that treaty was confirmed by Article XI.
of the Definitive Treaty, signed at Paris on the 20th day of November,
1815.

By these treaties the island of Bourbon or Réunion, which the British
had captured at the same time as the Isle of France or Mauritius,
was restored to France, but no mention was made of the late French
possessions on the east coast of Madagascar in such restoration. The
contrary is indicated by an ordinance of the King of France, dated from
the Tuileries, December 17, 1817, regulating the terms on which trade
with Bourbon shall be open to the English. This ordinance states that
all kinds of merchandize brought in English vessels from the English
establishments in Mauritius, Seychelles, and the English settlements in
Madagascar, shall be admitted, subject to the same charges as those paid
by French vessels.

The only English settlements in Madagascar at that time were those that
had been surrendered by the French. The ordinance is signed by Louis
XVIII. and Count Molé.

In 1816 the Governor of Bourbon stated that France had no colonial claims
on Madagascar, but desired to trade with the island. In the previous year
the Governor of Mauritius had been authorized to allow trade for supplies
of provisions, namely, cattle and rice, to be prosecuted between Bourbon
and Madagascar.

The claim on the part of France to parts of the eastern coast of
Madagascar seems to have been an after-thought; and the French government
wished it to be understood that France had settlements there in 1792,
and that the Treaty of Paris, dated 30th of May, 1814, guaranteed the
restoration of these possessions.

But neither Tamatave nor Foulepointe, the only settlements held by
the French at the time of their capture by the English, were in their
possession in 1792, and it was not until 1804 that French troops had been
sent by General Decaën from the isle of France to Tamatave.

In the meantime Sir Robert Farquhar, Governor of the Mauritius, had, on
the part of England, surrendered both the above settlements—and another,
obtained by purchase, to the northward, to Radama.

Radama—the supreme chief of the island—had by a proclamation declared
that he considered Madagascar an independent kingdom, and that no foreign
power had any right or claim to the country.

At one time the Governor of Bourbon objected to the claim of England to
keep the settlements in Madagascar; and the French imperial government,
requiring that any settlements possessed by France in 1792 should be
given up to that power, orders were sent out to Mauritius that any such
settlements should be restored. But it does not appear that the French
had any settlements in Madagascar in 1792, or that any settlements were
given up to France by the English Governor of Mauritius.

In 1829 the French took possession of Tamatave, but it is well known
that it was taken from them in 1830 by Admiral Schomberg. A claim was
afterwards preferred, as stated by the Rev. Wm. Ellis, in his History of
Madagascar, vol. ii., p. 316, but it was denied by Radama.

The reasons for Great Britain not asserting the sovereign rights which
she obtained from France by the capture of the French settlements on the
east coast of Madagascar are obvious.

In the first place, the claims of France were neither founded in reason
nor in justice.

And in the second place, when Captain Lesage—the British agent—was sent
into Madagascar for the adjustment of these claims on the part of Great
Britain, he found, A.D. 1816, at the capital of the island, a great and
successful warrior king, who had established himself as supreme chief,
and proclaimed himself sovereign of the whole island.

It was at once seen that, by supporting this prince, who possessed a
liberal and enlightened mind, the great object of Great Britain in
establishing relations with Madagascar, namely, the suppression of the
slave-trade, would be most readily carried out; and, therefore, the
support of the British government was given to Radama, the great king
of Madagascar; and during the whole life-time of that prince he was
acknowledged by England as Radama Manjaka.

He became the undisputed king of the whole island, and lowered the French
flag wherever the folly of a few employés dared to hoist it—replacing it
with that of the Ilovas, the dominant race, whose chief he was, and whose
valour gave to him the sovereignty of Madagascar.

On the death of Radama, and the accession of Ranavola Manjaka, one of the
first acts of the queen was to annul the treaty made by Radama with Great
Britain. The British agent, Mr. Lyell, was insulted and obliged to retire
from the court of Antananarivo, and Great Britain has not since that
period had a representative in Madagascar.

Although diplomatic relations have ceased between the courts of St.
James’s and that of Antananarivo since the retirement of the British
agent, in 1831, still commercial intercourse has been maintained between
the islands of Madagascar and Mauritius; the east coast of the former,
from Tamatave southward, plentifully supplying the ever-increasing demand
of Mauritius.

Sixty-seven thousand head of cattle, and from three to four hundred tons
of rice, were by one merchant annually imported into Mauritius from
Madagascar previous to 1845.

In that year the trade of Madagascar was put a stop to by the unfortunate
interference of H.M.S. “Conway” and two French ships of war; and, for the
space of eight years, commercial relations ceased, and were only renewed
in 1853-54 in consequence of the Mauritius merchants paying the queen of
Madagascar an indemnification of fifteen thousand dollars.

The government of Madagascar is anxious to be on the most friendly terms
with Great Britain; and, as the Rev. Mr. Ellis says in his recent work on
that interesting island, “the Madagascar people will never forget that
the King of England and the people of England have been their best and
constant friends.”

How different is the view presented by France to the Malagasy people.
Ever bent on conquering the great island, the bravery of whose sons has
baffled her for more than two and a half centuries, she has seized upon
every pretext for obtaining possession of neighbouring small islands,
from which she could harass and irritate the natives of Madagascar.

These possessions have been obtained in the most illegitimate
manner—native princes springing up and ceding to the great French nation
territory which does not belong to them.

Madagascar and its dependencies belong to Ranavola Manjaka, who inherits
them by succession from her predecessor, Radama, who obtained them
by right of conquest over all the native princes; and yet we hear of
ex-kings of the Sakalaves and different people ceding to France territory
which they have no more right to than to the tin mines of Cornwall.

Nevertheless, the French have established themselves in Mayotte,
Nossi-bé, and St. Mary’s by means of such claims.

The first-named of these islands, Mayotte, in the time of Louis
Philippe, was strongly fortified, with the intention of making it the
Gibraltar of the Indian Ocean. It is surrounded by a reef, in which it
was supposed, when these fortifications were built, there was only one
narrow entrance, which was completely commanded by the powerful batteries
raised at that time; but subsequent experience has proved that these are
entirely useless, as that enterprise which particularly distinguishes
the British seaman has found a passage through these reefs safer than
the narrow entrance commanded by the French cannon, by which vessels of
the largest draught of water could enter and shell the French Gibraltar,
while the breeches of the guns of this formidable battery were pointed
towards the foe. On this island they have no water, and are obliged to
obtain it from Madagascar. The soldiers die, as the French say, “like
rotten sheep.” Within the last twelve months large quantities of coal
have been collected at Mayotte, and no doubt that island would be the
centre of operations on Aden, Bombay, Natal, the Cape of Good Hope,
and Ceylon; but it is satisfactory to know that the party most deeply
interested is fully prepared for any contingencies which _may_ arise.

The island of Nossi-bé (the meaning of the native name by which it is
known being “large island”) has upon it, including the small garrison
kept there by the French, about 150 Europeans. The town on this island
is called, after one of the late governors of Réunion, Hell Town; and
it is by no means a misnomer, for the deeds enacted there throw those
perpetrated at Otaheite, on the bosom of the beautiful Pacific Ocean,
entirely in the shade. The native population, including that of the
small islands of Nossi Comba and Nossi Fali, is, according to the census
recently taken, 26,700 souls. These people have been principally employed
by the French to attack the Hova forts and settlements in the former
Sakalave districts, but as they found that the garrison of Mouransung
were rather their superiors in incendiary expeditions, the small French
settlement has been glad to cry “Pax!” of late.

At other places in Madagascar, the French have their agents in the
Jesuits. Two of these priests, represented as very intelligent men,
are located in St. Augustine Bay; and so much is the government of
Réunion interested in them, that every two months a government schooner
communicates with them, to attend to the wants of the holy fathers.

The Jesuits have a very extensive school at Réunion for the education
of Malagasy children, whom they obtain principally from the French
settlements of Nossi-bé and St. Mary.

These children remain at Réunion ten or twelve years, according to their
age. The boys are generally brought up as mechanics; the girls are taught
sewing, &c., while all learn to read and write. When educated they are
returned to their own country; and having been brought up in the Roman
Catholic religion, they often induce their relatives and friends to be
baptized in that faith.

Children are easily obtained, more especially on the north-west or
Sakalave portion of the island; for among them Radama did not abolish
infanticide, although he succeeded in doing so among the other nations
of the island. Among the Sakalaves, every child born on a Friday is
abandoned, and these, added to the numbers who are exposed by the heathen
party throughout the island if born on what the diviners designate an
unlucky _omen_ or _day_, and saved for the Jesuits, form a numerous
aggregate.

My informer, an English gentleman who has been out there for some years,
says that he has seen in the school at Nossi-bé as many as twenty boys
and girls, who had been abandoned as above stated, and afterwards
conveyed by the police to the Sisters of Charity.

There is no doubt that the children thus educated at Réunion will help
very much to extend the influence of the French amongst the tribes on the
coast of Madagascar. These Jesuits cast their bread upon the waters, and
after many days it will return unto them. They do so very judiciously,
especially devoting their attention to the Malagasy girls, knowing well
the great advantages of educating the future _mothers_ of the Madagascar
people in French interests.

The recent attempt of the French to obtain the upper hand in Madagascar,
by creating a revolution in that island, has resulted in the most
humiliating failure, and has given to the British interest that
preponderance which it is sure to maintain with a noble race like the
Malagasy people, as long as our relations with them are conducted on
just and honourable principles.

A. M. Lambert, of the late firm of Minon, Lambert, & Co., of Port Louis,
Mauritius, visited Antananarivo in 1855, avowedly with commercial
intentions; and while in the capital of Madagascar, he made certain
political proposals to a number of the most influential of the chiefs,
but with what success is not exactly known.

He is reported to have received a number of cattle from the Hova
government, or chiefs, to be disposed of at Mauritius, the proceeds of
which he was to spend in such articles as the natives required, which
were to be brought out when he renewed his visit to Antananarivo from
France, where he was going to make a short stay.

Madame Ida Pfeiffer, the celebrated lady traveller, was at that time in
England raising a subscription to enable her to visit Madagascar, in
which object she was successful; the Mauritius papers reported that the
Prince Consort contributed 10_l_., and the British Association for the
Advancement of Science a similar amount, towards this purpose.

After M. Lambert’s return to Paris from his political visit in 1855,
Madame Ida Pfeiffer went to France; but it cannot be said with certainty
whether she met M. Lambert there, or what assistance she received from
the French for her proposed expedition.

M. Lambert having made the necessary arrangements in Paris, and being
favoured with two audiences by the Emperor of the French, proceeded to
Madagascar, and, having called at the Cape of Good Hope _en route_, he
there met with Madame Ida Pfeiffer. The Frenchman, charmed with the
enterprise of this aged lady, offered his services as knight-errant on
the occasion; and Madame, nothing loth, accepted his offers to escort
her to Antananarivo. Arrived at Mauritius, where they had to await the
return of the healthy season, the knight-errant recollected that he
was charged, among numerous other things, with a pianoforte for the
Queen of Madagascar; and not being a musician, he bethought him to make
Madame Pfeiffer useful; and accordingly suggested to her the necessity
of her learning the pianoforte, in order to play it before the Queen
of Madagascar. The aged Ida acquiesced immediately, and made herself
mistress of the instrument before she left Mauritius.

At Mozambique I learned of this intended expedition of M. Lambert,
and the large amount of presents which he was taking up with him. On
inquiry I found that Minon, Lambert, & Co., were a very young firm at
Mauritius—the former gentleman having been a clerk in a bank at Paris,
and the latter a civil engineer there, a short time before they made
their appearance at Mauritius. The amount of the presents was stated
to be 2,000_l._; and as I knew that this was a sum which a young firm
could not well afford to give away, I might very fairly surmise that the
funds came from Paris; while the munificence of the gifts gave them an
_imperial_ aspect.

At the same time that M. Lambert was to arrive at Antananarivo, Père
Jean, Préfet Apostolique of Madagascar, and the head of the Jesuit
Mission in that island and its neighbourhood, would visit that capital,
disguised as a trader.

In Dalrymple Bay M. Lambert had a vessel anchored, by which the Hova
chiefs, whose aid he expected, might escape to the neighbouring island
of Mohilla, in the event of failure; and, in fact, every precaution was
taken to secure success in the contemplated expedition which was to give
Madagascar to France at last.

Being apprized of the whole of the above circumstances, I sent several
letters from Mozambique to Madame Ida Pfeiffer, in the hope that she
would be warned in time, and not take part in such an enterprise, as it
was well known in Madagascar that this travelling lady was going to visit
the island from England.

In the healthy season of 1857, M. Lambert, accompanied by Madame Ida
Pfeiffer, arrived at Antananarivo, where he was met by Père Jean, who was
disguised as a trader: “the end justifies the means.”

M. Lambert was welcomed by his countryman, M. Laborde, master of the
ceremonies at Antananarivo, late slave-dealer, and, by repute, if
possible something worse.

M. Lambert took up a great number of presents, consisting of horses,
camels, musical instruments, &c. He was treated with great hospitality
and attention by all parties. Meanwhile the priest, the slave-dealer,
and the ambassador (?) worked hard in their projected scheme; and, in
the course of a fortnight or so, these three worthies had proposed to a
number of the chief people “to put the Queen Ranavola aside, and place
another ruler on the throne, allowing the Queen a pension—to form a
treaty of alliance between the French and the Prince whom they should
put on the throne—to establish the Roman Catholic religion as the only
religion to be allowed in Madagascar—and to abolish domestic slavery, &c.”

The conspirators rejoiced, for the time of putting the plot into
execution arrived.

There was a grand entertainment given at the Palace, and, if practicable,
the Queen and her principal adherents were to be seized.

Madame Pfeiffer, the three French worthies, and all the chief personages
were invited; but in the middle of the entertainment the awful
intelligence was announced that the Queen had discovered the conspiracy
to dethrone her, and seize the government of the kingdom.

Immediately the wretched Madame Pfeiffer and the three Frenchmen were
made prisoners, and placed in the midst of a great concourse of people,
where a deathlike silence prevailed, in anticipation of the doom which
awaited them.

After a fearful suspense, during which the Queen, surrounded by her
council, decided upon their fate, it was announced that the Queen had
spared the lives of the conspirators; but they were to be banished from
the island within a certain time; and if ever they were found on the
island again the forfeit of their lives would be the penalty.

Laborde refused to go, but was forced away by the officers; and they were
accompanied to the coast by the Queen’s officers, who had instructions to
lead them through the most insalubrious districts, so that the malaria of
the swamps might seize upon their constitutions.

On arriving at the coast they were embarked and sent from the island
within the time specified by the Queen.

Madame Ida Pfeiffer for a long time hung between life and death, but the
kind nursing of the hospitable people of Mauritius at length restored her
sufficiently to enable her to embark in a ship for Europe; but it was
only to arrive in her native country to die.

M. Lambert proceeded to Paris, where want of success made him an
unwelcome guest. He returned to Mauritius, where I saw him for a few
moments. He appeared intent upon another attempt on the crown of
Madagascar, and sanguine of success.

There are various accounts of the manner in which the Queen became aware
of the conspiracy which threatened her crown.

One is, that two of the conspirators, being native chiefs, communicated
the particulars of the conspiracy to the government. Another, that among
the _et ceteras_ of the presents conveyed by Lambert to Antananarivo
there was a writing-desk for the Queen, in a secret drawer of which there
was a letter warning her Majesty of the intended attempt to overthrow her
government.

There is no doubt that the government were fully aware of what was
meditated long before the _dénouement_; and it is certain that the
warning came through English influence, but by what channel I do not feel
farther at liberty to state.

The commerce of the island has not increased since the re-opening of
the trade in 1853-4 so much as was expected—the political state of
the country not being favourable to industry and cultivation; and the
present policy is rather to restrict than to encourage commerce, as the
government do not want to make the island more attractive to foreigners,
or to make it more desirable as a possession.

Cattle and rice are to be obtained in every portion of the island.
Orchella-weed is found in enormous quantities all over Madagascar. Silk,
wool, cotton, and the most valuable and varied descriptions of timber
for ship-building and all other purposes, are to be procured in the
greatest abundance. Large quantities of India-rubber have been exported
since 1834, and the gutta-percha tree is also found. Gums, dyes from
woods, nuts, and roots are in great plenty, and it only requires the
independence of this noble people to be secured, when the trade would be
enormous.

The French will never obtain possession of the island, for the forests
and fevers in the lower districts are its natural protectors; and while
the present state of things lasts, there will be no roads made, for these
would only facilitate the conquest of the island—a fact to which the
Malagasy are quite alive.

A specimen of the coal from the north-west end of Madagascar was given
to me when at Mauritius. It appears to be of an inferior quality, but
doubtless many seams of superior coal lie in that portion of the island
closely adjoining the iron districts.

Madagascar is rich in valuable articles of export, but its resources are
yet comparatively unknown. During the reign of Radama the demand for
articles of European manufacture increased with astonishing rapidity.
Since the death of Radama the trade of Madagascar has very much declined.
The reasons are obvious. The government of the Queen, unsupported by
Great Britain, does not hold that command over the whole of the island
which was accorded to Radama alone; and this want of confidence in
themselves has revived that continued fear of invasion which harassed
the Malagasy people for so long a period, and for more than two hundred
years, in the person of the French nation, has been their persecuting
demon.

Thoughtful men inquire how a stop may be put to this state of things,
which deprives five millions of human beings of the benefits of
civilization, robs them of the religion of Christ, and continues them,
and them alone (for everywhere but in Madagascar there is progress), in
a state of semi-barbarism, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and fifty-nine.

The answer to the question is simply—Let France, once and for ever,
withdraw claims which have not their foundation in right, justice,
or humanity, on Madagascar; and join with England and America in a
tri-partite treaty, guaranteeing the independence of the Malagasy people.
Immediately the ports of Madagascar would be thrown open; commercial
relations would be encouraged, the resources of the island developed, a
permanent government established; roads, canals, bridges, steamboats, and
railroads would appear where now are to be found only the pathway through
the gloomy forest, and the canoe on the silent stream.

From Aden the copper cable, resting on one of the Comoro Islands, would
convey the message to Bombatok, which, flashing through the wires at
Antananarivo and Tamatave, would through another cable pass on to Réunion
and Mauritius, and thence to Ceylon, to “farthest India and Cathay,” the
glad tidings that the Queen of the Indian Ocean had joined the family
of civilized and Christianized man. Less than five years may see this
accomplished.




CHAPTER VII.

    The Vale Estate—Departure from Mauritius—Réunion—Ex-mayor of
    St. Denis—History of Seychelles—Equable Temperature—Magnificent
    Harbour of Refuge in the Centre of the Indian Ocean—Actors
    in the Reign of Terror—Products—Sperm Whale—Turtle—Coco de
    Mer—Exports.


After a stay of ten weeks at Mauritius, two steamers having arrived from
Aden without any instructions not to proceed to England, as indicated in
my telegram to the Foreign Office, and feeling that we were sufficiently
recovered to bear the fatigue of travelling, we embarked on board the
mail steamer “Granada,” chartered by the Mauritian government for the
conveyance of the mail to and from Aden.

Our restoration to health was in a great measure to be attributed to
the kind attentions of our friends at the “Vale Estate,” where we were
guests during the last four weeks of our stay at Mauritius. Here I had an
opportunity of making myself acquainted with the manufacture of sugar,
the cultivation of the cane, and the general management of a sugar
estate, under the tuition of my esteemed friend, Mr. Thomas Wade West.

We embarked on board the “Granada,” on the afternoon of the 11th of
September, where we found a number of kind friends who had gone on board
to say farewell to us; among whom was the worthy Lord Bishop, whose
attention, together with that of his wife and family, had been most
unremitting during our sojourn on the island.

The moorings were slipped—our friends departed—the screw revolved—and the
beautiful “Granada” glided out of Port Louis. The next day we were off
Réunion, where we had to call for the mails, and the aspect alone of the
island, when compared to Mauritius, told at once in favour of the latter.

Mauritius has two splendid harbours, and a number of minor ones; but
Réunion has not a single harbour. Vessels anchor all round Réunion,
for every place is equally safe and equally dangerous; when it comes
on to blow there is nothing for it but to stand out to sea. The French
Imperial Government have voted a million and a half of francs for the
construction of a harbour; and there is one part of the island where this
may be effected. In the hurricane months it is extremely dangerous even
to approach the island—for in case of being dismasted, and the island
becoming a lee shore, during the violence of the tempest there is no
safety to be found in anchor or cable; and destruction awaits the barque
that reaches the surrounding reefs or the surf-beaten shore.

While we were embarking the mails, I observed the small war-steamer “Mahé
Lebourdonnais,” which had afforded me such valuable aid at Mozambique,
when the Portuguese doctors refused to visit the patients in my house who
were attacked with fever. I regretted exceedingly that I was not able to
go on board to thank both the commander and surgeon for the aid they
afforded me at a very trying moment, but I hope to have the pleasure of
doing so at some future time.

We embarked two passengers at Réunion with the mails, and proceeded on
our voyage. One of these passengers was the captain of a French merchant
vessel. He was excessively amusing, and kept us company to Marseilles.
It appears that he had loaded his ship in the Malay Islands with a very
valuable cargo, and, having put the mate in charge to bring her to
France, was travelling home express. He was a very sharp fellow, and
up to everything going on at Madagascar. Finding that I had learned a
little, he became very communicative, and confirmed much that I had heard.

The other passenger from Réunion was the ex-mayor of St. Denis, the
capital of the island. At first he was very civil, but having learned my
name, and that I was Her Majesty’s consul for Mozambique, he told his
countryman that I was the destroyer of Réunion, for that I had completely
stopped the French free labour emigration from Mozambique to the French
island. For the remainder of the voyage I had nothing but black looks
from the ex-mayor, and it was very evident that he regarded me as one who
had caused him the loss of large sums of money. This led to inquiry on my
part, and I learned that the ex-mayor was the principal labour importer
for Réunion.

In a week after leaving Mauritius we anchored for a few hours in the
magnificent harbour of Port Victoria, in the island of Mahé, the
principal of the archipelago known as the Seychelles.

Proceeding on shore, we called on the acting commissioner, Mr. Charles
Telfair; and as his lady was not only a countrywoman, but a namesake of
my own, we at once received a “hearty Highland welcome” in this paradise
of the Indian Ocean.

The following sketch of the Seychelles is principally from information
afforded to me by Mr. Telfair during my short stay there, and any
omission I hope may be attributed to the writer rather than to his
obliging informant.

These islands, twenty-nine in number, form an archipelago which is the
most considerable of the dependencies of the island of Mauritius; they
extend from 3° 33′ to 5° 35′ south latitude, and from 55° 15′ to 56° 10′
east longitude; they lie at a distance of 915 miles from Mauritius, 550
miles from Madagascar, and 1500 miles from the continent of India.

The Seychelles were first discovered by the Portuguese in the sixteenth
century—probably by the squadron belonging to that nation, which, under
the command of Fernan Suarez, was driven upon the coast of San Lourenço
or Madagascar by a hurricane, A.D. 1506.

The Portuguese called them the _Seven_ Brothers, from a group of seven
islands near Mahé.

They are all mountainous, well watered, and richly wooded. In 1742 they
were explored by Captain Lazare Picault, in the tartane “L’Elizabeth,”
despatched from the isle of France by Mahé de Labourdonnais.

Captain Picault, having taken possession in the name of the King of
France, called them Labourdonnais Islands, after the great governor
of the Isle of France; and the principal one Mahé—which name has been
retained to this day; but subsequently that of Seychelles was substituted
for Labourdonnais, in honour of Viscount Herault de Seychelles, at that
time marine minister of France. The Seychelles islands are composed of:—

1. Isle Mahé; 2. Ste. Anne; 3. Aux Cerfs; 4. Anonyme; 5. Sud-Est;
6. Longue; 7. Moyenne; 8. Ronde; 9. Thérèse; 10. La Conception; 11.
Silhouette; 12. Du Nord; 13. Praslin; 14. Ladigue; 15. Curieuse; 16.
Ronde; 17. Aride; 18. Félicité; 19, 20. Les Deux Sœurs; 21. Marianne;
22. Aux Récifs; 23. Les Mamelles; 24, 25. Cousin et Cousine; 26. Aux
Frégates; 27. Aux Vaches Marines; 28. Denis, the most northerly; 29.
Plate, the most southerly.

They rest upon a bank of sand and coral. The climate of the Seychelles
is mild, and considered very healthy; from the mountainous formation of
these islands, and an entire absence of marshy districts, there is no
predisposing cause for malaria or miasma, and they are exempt from all
epidemic diseases and endemic fevers.

The Mauritius and Réunion hurricanes do not extend to the Seychelles,
their limit being about 10° S: so likewise those hurricanes which strike
the north end of Madagascar, and devastate the Mozambique coast, do not
approach the Seychelles. This may fairly be attributed to the equable
temperature which they enjoy.

Although situated near the equator, these islands do not experience
the great heat so common to the countries in their neighbourhood,
the temperature being always about the same, viz., from 80° to 84°
Fahrenheit: the extremes are from 70° to 74° at night in the cool season,
and from 84° to occasionally 92° in the hot and rainy season.

The two monsoons known at the Seychelles Islands are the S.E., prevailing
from May to October, the cool season; and the N.W., from November to
April, the hot and rainy season. During the N.W. monsoon, occasionally,
squalls, accompanied by lightning and very heavy rains, make their
appearance. These islands, situated in almost the middle of the Indian
Ocean, at nearly equal distances from the neighbouring countries, in
addition to their salubrious climate, possess a large and wonderfully
safe harbour, in which fleets may lie in security, even during the
hurricane season, when it is dangerous to remain in any port of the
neighbouring countries.

Although these islands were known to the navigators of the sixteenth
century, and the Arabs, they were not colonized before 1742, after
the exploration of Captain Lazare Picault, when a few French settlers
from Bourbon and Mauritius established themselves on the principal
island—Mahé. Unfortunately, in clearing the ground for their plantations
of manico, maize, rice, &c., forests of valuable timber were destroyed
by fire. In 1750 a commandant and a civil commissioner was appointed by
the French government—the last of whom, M. Quean de Quincy, in 1794,
capitulated to a small British squadron, consisting of the “Orpheus,”
“Centurion,” and “Resistance,” under the command of Commodore Newcome.

In 1801 the French government banished from France 132 of the wretches
who had acted in the most atrocious scenes of the Reign of Terror. Having
been prevented from landing at the Isle of France they were conveyed
to the Seychelles, which resulted to France in the loss of the two
vessels employed upon the service; for the “Chiffonne,” whilst refitting
at Seychelles, was captured by the “Cybèle,” Captain Adams—and the
“Flèche,” after a long chase and a gallant resistance on her part, was
sunk by the “Victor,” Captain Cullis.

In 1814 these islands were formally ceded to Great Britain, as one of the
dependencies of Mauritius. Mahé, the principal island, is about seventeen
miles long, and about four miles broad; it attains an elevation of 2,000
feet in height, and may be seen at a distance of twelve to fifteen
leagues.

It is mountainous, of primary formation, hard granite rock, the soil
varied and productive, watered with numerous rivulets, and, being well
wooded, the scenery is very picturesque.

On the east side of the island is a magnificent bay, about four miles
deep, and three and a half miles wide; it is enclosed, excepting towards
the north, by several small islands, the outermost of which is Ste. Anne;
outside of these islands are extensive reefs of coral, an opening through
which, easily approached, leads to this harbour of refuge, formed by
nature, in the Indian Ocean.

The roadstead could contain from 300 to 400 vessels, while in the harbour
five or six sail of the line might be safely moored, with sufficient room
for smaller vessels.

Hurricanes and gales of wind are never known there: even during the N.W.
monsoon the squalls from W. to S.W. or N.W. to N. are not so heavy as
to require more than one good anchor and cable—the holding-ground being
pipe-clay, with an intermixture of shell.

From the harbour, a narrow channel through the reefs (which might be
easily enlarged) leads to an inner harbour, or rather basin, where large
ships may be hove down for repair.

The adjoining land is well adapted for dry docks and ship-building yards.

The coral which would have to be removed for the improvement of the outer
and inner harbours could be employed for building the upper portions of
the wharves—as, on being removed from the sea, and exposed to the air,
it hardens and assumes the appearance of white marble; when in its soft
state it is easily worked; and, already, at Seychelles it is used for
building purposes. A beautiful little church which is now being erected
there is entirely composed of this coral.

In 1841, by special permission of the Queen, the name of Port Victoria
was given to this magnificent harbour.

In the bight of the bay lies the town; the houses being built of wood and
covered with shingles, it has not a very imposing appearance.

Situated in the opening of a ravine, at the foot of a range of hills
covered with wood, and immediately under the highest, is the “Morne
Blanc,” rising to an elevation of 1300 feet; in the course of time, when
the capabilities of these islands will have become known, and the coral
extensively used for building purposes, a city worthy of the name of the
port may grace the spot which nature has already rendered beautiful and
lovely in the extreme.

During the S.E. monsoon there is good anchorage on the west side of Mahé;
but heavy gusts come over the high land when the winds are moderate and
steady on the east side.

From 1817 to 1827, a flourishing and lucrative cotton-trade was carried
on at the Seychelles, and it requires only labour to compete with America
in this article, which it produces of the very finest, silky sea-island
quality.

The sugar-cane grows luxuriantly. A sugar-house and mill were erected at
Mahé some time since, at considerable expense; but it is not working,
simply for the want of labour.

There is no tobacco superior to that grown at Seychelles; yet very little
is exported.

Rice of the very best quality, far superior to that brought from India
for the supply of Mauritius, might be exported from the Seychelles, but
at present rice is sent from Mauritius to these islands.

Vessels, from small coasters up to ships of 400 and 500 tons, have been
built at Seychelles; they have always been found strong and durable, and
being built of wood impervious to the toredo navilis, they are peculiarly
adapted for tropical seas.

Timber, for ship-building, furniture, and all domestic purposes, is to be
found in abundance.

Forests of excellent wood, called “Capuchin,” one of the most durable
kinds known, are falling daily, and rotting on the ground.

The “bois puant,” so well adapted for the spokes of cart and carriage
wheels, is in great abundance; it is very valuable, and spokes in large
numbers might be prepared for exportation.

The “bois de natte” is an ornamented wood, suitable for furniture; it is
of a reddish colour, very closely grained, and marked something like fine
heart of oak.

This wood is highly esteemed at Mauritius; it has been observed that the
most curiously marked grows on rocky places—where, from the difficulty
and slowness of its growth, it becomes contracted and stunted. Nearly the
whole of the forests belong to government, and require only roads, so as
to get at them, to become very remunerative; the roads for this purpose
would be easy of construction, and could be made at no very great expense.

The sperm whale is found about the Seychelles, but the numerous
whaling-vessels, both English and American, visit the Comoro Islands for
supplies, being, I am told, deterred from entering Port Victoria by the
heavy harbour dues. With the large herds of cattle, and ample supplies
of vegetables, to be obtained at these islands, it would be but a wise
policy to make this port free to all vessels simply calling for supplies.

The domestic animals comprise the cow, sheep, dog and cat. Pigs and
poultry in all varieties are to be found in abundance—as are likewise
fish, tree and rock oysters, guinea fowl, pigeons, doves, and willow
birds; rice, maize, manioc, coffee, sugar-cane, chocolate, cloves,
cinnamon; among the fruits may be named pine-apples, bread-fruit,
raspberries, grapes, maniæ tamarinds, mangoes, bananas, limes, oranges,
guavas; among the vegetables, yams, sweet potatoes, carrots, turnips,
pumpkins, &c.; and there is even a description of tea called hyapunna.

The oranges are the most delicious I ever tasted. Last year two-thirds
of the cloves that were produced by the remains of the spice gardens
established by Mahé Labourdonnais were left on the ground for want
of labour to gather them. Pine-apples are in such abundance, that I
proposed, when there in the month of September 1858, that they should be
used for making wine. At Natal wine is made from the pine-apple, which
is stated to be a superior champagne.

These islands are visited by the hawk-billed turtle, from which the
natives obtain the tortoise-shell. In some countries, where the fishermen
take the turtle alive, they bury it in sand as far as the edge of the
shell, and by kindling a fire on its back, or by pouring boiling water
on it, the shell becomes detached, and the turtle is then liberated. By
some it is stated that Nature furnishes it with a new shell, but the
Seychellois sacrifice the animal to obtain the shell.

The hawk-billed turtle weighs from 100 to 150 pounds, and yields from
two to six pounds of tortoise-shell, worth from six to nine dollars per
pound. The flesh of the hawk-billed turtle is considered poisonous, but
some affirm it to be fit for food.

Green turtle, the flesh of which is so delicious, are also found in
great numbers; oil is extracted from them, and occasionally the flesh
is salted and exported to Mauritius. Even the shell of this species has
lately come into use—in Europe for veneering purposes—and is melted
into an imitation of tortoise-shell. The green turtle weighs from 200 to
300 pounds, and the flesh is worth about four dollars per pound. Both
descriptions of turtle are obtained, when they come on shore to lay their
eggs, by turning them on their backs, when they are quite helpless; and
also by striking them at sea with a light harpoon.

The best months for procuring the hawk-billed turtle are from July
to December, and from December to March the green turtle are easily
obtained, those being the laying seasons.

They both lay many hundreds of eggs in large holes, which they scoop out
with their fins in the sand, and, having covered them over, they leave
them to be hatched by the sun and by time.

It is worthy of remark that the hawk-billed turtle comes on shore to lay
during the day, and the green turtle, with but few exceptions, during the
night. The Seychellois call the hawk-billed turtle “Caret,” and the green
turtle “Tortue.”

These islands have obtained a world-wide celebrity, from being the only
place yet known where the Coco de Mer (the most curious of the palms, so
justly styled by Linnæus the prince of the vegetable kingdom), is found.
This species of palm—known as the _Ladoicea Sechellarum, the double
cocoa-nut_, the _Coco de Mer_, the _Cocos Maldivicus_ of Rumphius, and
_Nux Medica_ of Clusius—is from 50 to 120 feet in height, and from 12 to
15 inches in diameter, with scarcely any difference in size to the top,
where it is crowned with a tuft of leaves; and the whole of the stem is
so flexible that the tops of those trees which stand in each other’s
vicinity strike against and chafe each other in a strong breeze.

On the stem rings, four inches apart, mark the annular age of this palm,
which, even in this archipelago, is confined to Praslin, Curieuse, and
Ronde, on which islands alone it appears to bear fruit.

The leaves are very large and open, like a fan; they are from 20 to 30
feet in length, including the petiole, which is of sufficient strength to
support a man.

The tree is twenty or thirty years old before it bears fruit, and always
130 years are required before it attains its full development.

The fruit is generally double, sometimes triple and even quadruple;
when young the fruit is refreshing, and not unlike ice sherbet in
appearance, and in taste it somewhat resembles the common cocoa-nut, and
is remarkably cold when taken out of the shell.

The germ when developed is a sweet dish. The fruit remains on the tree
about three years, and when ripe it drops off the tree and is no longer
fit for food. In a few months, if not exposed to the rays of the sun, the
fallen nut germinates and a new plant is formed.

It bears only one spadix in each year, and yet it is said to have above
ten in bloom at once—thus bearing flowers and fruit of all ages at the
same time.

The crown of the trunk is called cabbage, and is eaten like that of
the true cabbage palm. This part of the tree, like that of the common
cocoa-nut when parboiled, tastes like cooked chestnuts; and when cut
into strips about eight inches long and well-boiled, is remarkably like
asparagus.

The trunk is employed for making palisades and water-troughs.

The leaves are taken to thatch houses, and even fences.

The down, which is attached to the young leaves, serves for filling
mattresses and pillows.

With the ribs of the leaves and fibres of the petiole, baskets and brooms
are made.

The young unexpanded leaves are bleached in the sun until they become
quite white; they are then cut into longitudinal strips, and plaited for
making beautiful hats and bonnets; elegant fans, and also fancy baskets,
are made from the young leaves, by the Seychelles ladies, who excel in
this work.

Out of the nut, beautiful vessels of different forms and for various uses
are made; amongst other articles, shaving dishes, black, beautifully
polished, set in silver and carved, are made from it.

A long and remarkably correct account of the _Lodoicea Seychellarum_ is
given by Sir W. J. Hooker in the “Botanical Magazine and Register,” vol.
xii., from which I have largely borrowed information relative to this
wonder of the vegetable kingdom.

In a recent communication to me from that distinguished botanist,
relative to the Seychelles, Sir William says, “I may add, too, that
though these islands are British, with the exception of the Coco de Mer,
and one or two objects, such as curiosities, we are as ignorant of the
vegetable productions as if it were a region in the very centre of Africa
or Australia, where no human foot has yet trod.”

The venilla bean is cultivated at Mauritius and Bourbon, despite the
hurricanes, which in their visits to these islands destroy this article
of commerce; it has lately been introduced into the Seychelles, and will
in these islands, free from tempests, become a source of wealth to the
inhabitants.

The exports through the customs at Seychelles, for the year ending 7th of
July 1858, were as follows:—

    Cocoa-nut oil              19,750 gallons
    Fish                        1,805    ”
    Cocos de Mer                3,463    ”
    Vacoa bags                119,996    ”
    Spokes for cart wheels     45,902    ”
    Tortoise-shell, 2 cases       223 lbs.
    Do., weight not given          15 cases
    Wax                             1 do.

The above is the total production of 7000 inhabitants, with the sexes
about equally divided.

The largest item, the vacoa bags, exported to Mauritius for holding
sugar, might be produced by one hundred persons in a year; and it appears
that the oil is made by Creoles sent from Mauritius—the Seychellois
being at present a lazy, indolent people, given to pleasure and idle
amusements; the soil they will not cultivate, preferring to gain a
subsistence from the sea.

This love of the ocean might be turned to advantage, by encouraging
maritime pursuits and commercial relations between these islands,
Madagascar, and the whole of the east sea-board of Africa, for which the
Seychellois are already acclimatized. Nuts and seeds yielding oil might
be carried to the Seychelles, the oil made there, and exported to Europe
from these islands; the colouring matter from the orchella weed, at
present conveyed round the Cape of Good Hope, might be extracted at the
Seychelles and sent home by way of Suez.

The employment of these islands for the above purposes would cause a
great saving in the freight of ships now carrying the raw materials
to Europe, and would at the same time develop the resources of these
valuable islands.

With regard to the cultivation of the soil, if the government of
Mauritius was to introduce one thousand coolies from India direct, and
give some encouragement to the inhabitants of Mauritius to emigrate
there, by granting lands on favourable terms, capital would soon be
found, from the Mauritius, for the development of these islands, which,
already possessing a harbour of refuge suitable for their position,
nearly in the middle of the Indian Ocean, would soon rival Mauritius in
their productions and commercial and political importance.

At present, to keep up the establishment there, they cost the government
of Mauritius about £3000 per annum: with a judicious expenditure of
a few thousand pounds for the opening of roads to get at the valuable
timber, and the building of wharves for the inner harbour, the Seychelles
would soon yield a large and profitable revenue to Mauritius.




CHAPTER VIII.

    Arrival at Aden—Arabia the Ancient Nursery of Commerce—How Aden
    became a British Possession—Description of the Peninsula, Town,
    Tanks, &c.—Departure from Aden—Perim—Sight the Comet—Crossing
    the Desert—Arrival in England.


On the 25th September, just one week after leaving the Seychelles, the
“Granada” arrived at Aden, where we expected to meet with the steamer
from Bombay on her way to Suez.

The “Simla,” the vessel expected from Bombay, had not arrived; and there
being no hotel at Aden, the passengers were thrown upon the small village
at Steamer Point, to find accommodation as best they could. This is a
subject of continued complaint, and one great objection to the overland
route, which the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company might
easily obviate by erecting an hotel with reasonable charges, and keeping
a steamer in the port of Aden until such time as the hotel is adapted for
use. The accidents occurring in the Red Sea, and the frequent breaking
down of the machinery of some of these vessels, will render a reserve
vessel always necessary either at Suez or Aden; and, under existing
circumstances, for the accommodation of passengers arriving at the latter
place, and awaiting the irregular arrival of the company’s ships, Aden
ought never to be without a reserve vessel.

For myself, I always make it a point to pay respect to my flag, and
therefore paid my respects to the chief authority at Aden, Brigadier
William Marcus Coghlan, Political Resident and Commandant of the forces
at Aden.

The Brigadier was kind enough to give me a very hearty invitation to
reside with him while at Aden; and Mrs. M’Leod and myself felt the
benefit of the change from the “Granada,” in the harbour of Back Bay, to
the Brigadier’s cool bungalow on Steamer Point.

Bunder Toowaï, or Aden Harbour, has at various periods of the world’s
history commanded the commerce of the East; and, from the remotest
antiquity, it has been an emporium for the great commercial nation of
the age. It is not, therefore, surprising that at the present date the
British flag should float triumphantly over the seaport of the Queen of
Sheba.

On looking at a chart of the world we are at once struck with the
position of Arabia, whose seaport Aden is.

It is almost insular, lying between Asia, Africa, and India. On two sides
it is bounded by the ocean, on a third by the desert, and on the fourth
side it was the _point d’appui_ of the commerce established, by way of
the Persian Gulf, between the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean.

On the one side it has Egypt, on the other Palestine, Syria, Babylon,
Chaldea; and the Divine Creator has given it the patient and unwearied
camel, the ship of the desert, to cross the ocean of sand which divides
it from those countries.

On the east lies the Gulf of Persia, which, by the river Euphrates,
reaches the heart of Western Asia; while the island of Ormus forms a
stepping-stone from its coast to that of India.

On the west the Red Sea protects it from the invasion of the Ethiopian
nations; placing it in communication with Egypt and Abyssinia: while
on the south the continent of Africa, at the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb,
visibly invites the natives of Arabia to visit its coasts.

Thus it is protected by a desert of sand, for the crossing of which there
is an animal specially provided on the one side; and on two others by the
ocean, which along six hundred miles of its coast invites the enterprise
of its inhabitants to search for richer lands.

By its proximity to Africa, from which it is visible, the western shore
of the Indian Ocean became known to the Arabs at an early date, with all
its gold, pearls, precious stones, and valuable woods and spices; and, by
way of the Persian Gulf, these first pioneers of commerce found a route
to its eastern shores, and likewise formed colonies in Western India.

When we remember that the Arabs were the first astronomers, it is natural
to suppose that these early observers of the heavens had, from the south
of Arabia, remarked that the wind blew from one quarter half the year,
and from the opposite for the remainder; and thus had been acquainted
with the regularity of the monsoons for ages before this wonderful
phenomenon of nature dawned upon the mind of the Greek philosopher and
mariner, Hippalus.

The knowledge of this remarkable fact would enable them to put to sea
with confidence, in search of the Arabian colonies already formed in
India and Africa.

From the former country did they obtain a knowledge of the needle which
points ever to the pole? This is probable, for the inhabitants of China
were acquainted with the mariner’s compass ages before Flavio Gioia of
Amalfi gave it to guide the wonderful discoveries of the European era of
conquest; and from the remotest antiquity China had commercial relations
with India.

From the Arab word “Maussem” (meaning “remarkable epoch”) the modern
name, monsoon, for the periodical winds which blow in the Indian Ocean,
is derived; and we know that when Vasco de Gama arrived at Mozambique,
the Arab dhows which he met with there, trading to the Red Sea, the
Persian Gulf, Madagascar, and India, were all supplied with an astrolabe,
or instrument for taking the altitude of the sun, moon, and stars, and
with the mariner’s compass. This is very natural; the Arabs had been
astronomers and navigators for many ages.

More than ten centuries before the advent of the Messiah, these Arabs
must have traded with India and Ophir, or Sofala, in East Africa, for we
find that the Queen of Sheba, or Saba or Yemen or Arabia (all names for
the land of the Arabs), on visiting Solomon at Jerusalem, B.C. 981, “gave
the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great
store, and precious stones; there came no more such abundance of spices
as these which the Queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.”[5]

These spices came from India, or north-eastern Africa, and the gold and
precious stones from Ophir;[6] for we have already proved that not one
of these articles was the produce of Arabia. In the time of Moses spices
were known and much used among the Hebrews, and the nearest places for
obtaining them were north-eastern Africa, the Malabar coast and Ceylon,
through the Arab’s emporium at Aden.

Aden has been successively occupied by the Persians and the Romans,
and, in more modern times, by the Turks, and the Portuguese. It became
a British possession under the following circumstances, as stated by
Captain Playfair, assistant political agent, in his “History of Arabia
Felix or Yemen” recently published, with the sanction of the Honourable
East India Company.

On the morning of the 4th of January, 1836, the Madras ship, “Deria
Dowlat,” under British colours, went on shore in the Koobet Sailán, a
few miles distant from Aden, having on board a valuable cargo, and a
number of pilgrims bound for Jedda. As daylight dawned she was boarded
by crowds of Arabs from Aden, who plundered her of everything that could
be removed. The passengers, amongst whom were several ladies of rank,
landed on rafts, in doing which fourteen perished. The survivors were
seized by the Arabs, stripped naked, and the females subjected to the
most brutal indignities, and only saved from being carried off into the
interior by the intercession of the Seyed of Aidroos, an influential
family in Aden, who supplied them with food and clothing.

The government of Bombay felt bound not only to demand redress for this
outrage, but to take such further precautions as should preclude the
recurrence of similar atrocities.

For this purpose Captain Haines, I.N., was despatched to Aden in the
Honourable Company’s sloop-of-war, “Coote;” and he was instructed, in the
event of his negotiations proving successful, to endeavour to obtain the
place by purchase, in order that British commerce in the Red Sea might be
placed on a safer footing for the future, and that a secure coal depôt
for the vessels engaged in the overland transit might be established.

On Captain Haines arrival at Aden, he had an interview with the Sultan
of Aden, when the latter denied, most solemnly, all knowledge of, or
participation in, the atrocity with which he was charged; but as the
property of the “Deria Dowlet” was being sold publicly in the market, his
assertion was not received. A formal demand was accordingly made for the
sum of 12,000 dollars, as an indemnity, or the entire restitution of the
plundered property. After much negotiation, goods to the value of 7,808
dollars were restored; and the Sultan passed a bill, at twelve months’
sight, to Captain Haynes, for the remaining 4,192 dollars.

Having thus settled the primary object of his mission, Captain Haynes
succeeded in obtaining from the Sultan a written bond, dated 23rd
January, 1838, that he would cede the peninsula on which Aden is built to
the British in the following March, in consideration of an annual pension
of 8,700 dollars. But before this could be embodied in a treaty, a plot
had been formed by the Sultan’s son for the seizure of the papers and
person of the political agent after the parting interview. Intelligence
of the meditated treachery having reached Captain Haines, the interview
was evaded, and he proceeded to Bombay.

On the 24th October, he again returned to Aden, authorized by his
government to enforce the completion of the stipulated agreement.

Captain Haynes’ requisition to the Sultan was met with language and
conduct the most violent and insulting. The Sultan refused to allow the
plundered property, which had formerly been restored, to be removed from
Aden: he issued orders that the “Coote” should not be supplied with water
or provisions, and his soldiers fired upon the pinnace of that vessel,
without the slightest provocation, slightly wounding two sailors.

In consequence of these outrages the port was blockaded; but ere a
month had elapsed the Sultan begged a truce of three days, which he
treacherously employed in sending a boat to Saiárah, on the African
coast, whence the “Coote” was supplied with provisions, to endeavour, by
a bribe of 200 dollars, to induce the Somalies to murder all the English
who landed there.

On the 18th December, the H.C. schooner “Mahi” and the barque “Anne
Crichton,” laden with coals, arrived; a most significant intimation to
the Sultan, had he chosen to accept it, that the British were determined
to enforce the fulfilment of the agreement into which he had voluntarily
entered.

On the 11th of January a skirmish took place off Seerah Island, between
the battery on the Mole, and the schooner “Mahi,” with two gunboats. Two
seamen were wounded, and about twenty or thirty of the Arabs put _hors de
combat_. On the 16th of January a force, consisting of H.M.S. “Volage,”
28 guns, under the command of Captain Smith, H.M.S. “Cruizer,” 10 guns,
with 300 European and 400 native troops, commanded by Major Baillie,
arrived at Aden. A final message was sent to the Sultan, directing him
to deliver up the place; but as this was not complied with the town was
bombarded and taken by assault. The loss on the side of the British was
15, and on that of the Arabs 150 men, killed and wounded.

The garrison consisted of 700 soldiers from the interior, and the
remaining population did not exceed 600, of whom a great proportion were
Jews. The Sultan, his family, and a number of the chief people of the
city effected their escape to Láhej.

Thus Aden fell into the hands of the British, being the first capture in
the reign of Her Majesty Queen Victoria, and from this period the process
of its restoration to something like its former importance was not less
rapid than had been its decline.

I have been thus particular in giving the official account of the British
conquest of Aden, as various erroneous statements have been made relative
to its seizure by England. These statements are marked by that ignorance
which usually accompanies the malevolent attacks on “_perfide Albion_.”

The British settlement of Aden is a peninsula of about fifteen miles in
circumference, of an irregular oval form, five miles in its greater and
three miles in its lesser diameter, connected with the continent by a
low, narrow neck of land, 1,350 yards in breadth, but which is in one
place nearly covered by the sea at high spring tides.

The formation of Aden is purely volcanic, and bears the appearance of
having been in recent activity. It is supposed that the peninsula was
originally an island, and became gradually connected by the accumulation
of sand in the narrow channel which intervened between it and the
mainland.

The whole peninsula is a large crater, formed by lofty and precipitous
hills, the highest of which, Shumshum, has an elevation of 1,755 feet,
but, being entirely destitute of vegetation, looks much higher.

The range of hills which forms the wall of the crater is nearly circular:
on the western side the hills are very precipitous, and the rain-water
descending from them is carried rapidly to the sea; on the interior, or
eastern side, the hills are quite as abrupt, but the descent is broken
by a table-land occurring midway between the summit and the sea-level,
which occupies about one-fourth of the entire superficies of Aden. This
plateau is intersected by numerous ravines, nearly all of which converge
into one valley, which thus receives the drainage of the peninsula. From
the remotest times this provision of nature has been seized upon for
supplying the town of Aden with water. Tanks of various dimensions, and
the most fantastic shapes, have been formed, in many cases by simply
building a dyke across a ravine; while they are so constructed that on
the overflowing of one the water reaches the next—and thus a complete
chain has been formed, reaching the heart of the town.

The annual fall of rain in Aden is very limited, seldom exceeding seven
inches; and as the neighbouring country is in too unsettled a state to
restore the aqueduct built by the Sultan of Yemen, Melek-el-Mansoor,
towards the close of the fifteenth century, which conveyed the water of
the Bir Hameed into Aden, and it having been found that increasing the
number of wells does not proportionately increase the supply of water,
recourse is now being had to condensing the water of the bay into fresh
water.

The scarcity of water in such a climate, and at a place of such
importance, both in a commercial and also a strategic light, is a matter
of serious consideration, and is engaging all the energies of Brigadier
Coghlan to remedy, by clearing out and repairing all the ancient tanks.

The town and the principal portion of the military cantonments are within
the crater already described, and consequently they are surrounded on all
sides by hills, except on the eastern face, where a gap exists opposite
the fortified island of Sheerah. This inlet is called Front or East Bay.

The crater has been cleft from north to south, and the rents thus
produced are called the northern and southern passes; the former, better
known as the main pass, is the only entrance into the town from the
interior or from the harbour.

When this town was visited by Captain Haynes, of the Indian navy, the
ruin of Aden appears to have been complete. It was nothing but a wretched
village, built on the ruins of the former city, containing about ninety
stone houses, in a dilapidated state, and only one mosque in a state of
repair. The remainder of the dwelling-places were miserable huts made of
mats. Its trade was annihilated, its wells brackish from neglect, and
everything bearing the mark of ruin and decay.

Since the conquest in 1839, how rapidly has it changed! A neat and
well-built town has superseded the former squalid-looking village. The
population has increased from 600 to 25,000; while the value of the
trade, including imports and exports, amounts to upwards of one million
sterling per annum.

All the ancient defences have been abandoned, and the place has been
entirely re-fortified. Strong by nature, immense sums have been expended,
and the highest engineering skill employed, to render it impregnable to
any probable attack. Nothing short of a large European force, naval and
military, supplied with a complete siege train, could succeed in making
any impression on it; and as long as Great Britain rules the ocean, with
the aid which our navy would render in case of being attacked, it may be
deemed impregnable, and pronounced the British Gibraltar of the Indian
Ocean.

Curious coins have frequently been found after heavy rains, and also
some highly interesting Himyaritic inscriptions. One had reached the
Brigadier’s hands while we were at Aden, and we were politely favoured
with a view of what may, by some, be deemed a portion of the inscription
on the tomb of the Queen of Sheba.

On the 29th of September, the “Simla” called at Aden, and we took leave
of our hospitable host, embarked, and were steamed out of Aden that
evening.

At daylight on the next day we were off Perim, a small island commanding
the entrance of the Red Sea, which has lately been re-occupied by the
British.

As this island holds a very important position in the event of war,
and is attached to the government of Aden, some account of it may be
acceptable to the general reader.

By the Arabs it is called Mayoon; to the ancients it was most probably
known as the island of Diodorus. It is situated in the straits of
Bab-el-Mandeb, a mile and a half from the Arabian shore, and eleven
miles from the coast of Africa. The safe channel for shipping is on the
north or Arabian side, and is barely half a mile in width. The passage
on the southern shore is exceedingly difficult, and may with a little
ingenuity be made impassable. It will thus be seen, that with suitable
fortifications, rendered bomb-proof, and built with a ventilation so that
the smoke of the gunpowder would clear away to enable the gunners to keep
up a constant fire, Perim may command the passage of the Red Sea, and,
if provided with impregnable fortifications, no fleet could force the
passage.

Of late years, in consequence of increasing steam navigation in the Red
Sea, the attention of the British government has been directed to the
necessity of a lighthouse to facilitate the navigation of the Straits of
Bab-el-Mandeb. And as the French government had early in 1857 despatched
a ship-of-war to hoist the tri-color on this island, the political agent
at Aden, very probably on being apprized of the circumstance, despatched
the assistant political agent, Capt. R. L. Playfair, to Perim, for the
purpose of re-occupying an island which, in the hands of Great Britain,
will be a Pharos for the Red Sea, instead of a standing menace to the
peaceful navigation of the East. With this intention the works have been
already commenced, and Perim will soon become another link of that chain
which shows our power to enlighten ignorance, and, if need be, to check
arrogance.

The formation of Perim is purely volcanic, and consists of long, low,
and gradually sloping hills, surrounding an excellent harbour, about a
mile and a half in length, and half a mile broad. This capacious harbour
has a depth of from four to six fathoms in the best anchorage, and could
easily accommodate a numerous fleet of ships, having a large draught of
water, should they be required for the protection of the island. About
one-fourth of the island, on the north side, consists of low plains
of sand and coral, scantily covered with salsola, sea-lavender, wild
mignonette, and other plants which delight in a salt sandy soil. The
remainder of the island is covered with a layer of loose boulders, or
masses of black vesicular lava, in some places so thickly set as to
resemble a rude pavement. Captain Playfair states the highest point of
the island to be 245 feet above the level of the sea.[7]

Perim has never been permanently occupied by any nation except the
British. The great Albuquerque landed upon it in 1513, on his return from
his unsuccessful expedition in the Red Sea. He erected a cross upon an
eminence, and called the island Vera Cruz.

The pirates who kept the Indian Ocean in such a state of excitement,
during a great portion of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
made this their stronghold for some time; but having dug through the
solid lava a distance of fifteen feet in search of water, they abandoned
their intention of settling there, and took up their abode in St. Mary’s
island, on the east coast of Madagascar. In 1799, a force from Bombay,
under Lieutenant Colonel Murray, was sent to occupy it, with the view of
preventing the French troops, then engaged in the occupation of Egypt,
from proceeding to India to effect a junction with Tippoo Saib. The
troops were subsequently withdrawn, and it has remained unoccupied until
the British standard was again hoisted upon it in 1857.

There being no water on the island, and but a scanty supply to be
obtained from the adjoining mainland, the water-tanks which have been
lately constructed are supplied from Aden, and reservoirs to collect the
rain are being erected, which, together with a condensing apparatus, will
fully supply its wants in this respect.

In proceeding up the Red Sea the weather was oppressively hot, and at
night the majority of the passengers were to be found on deck—sleep being
almost out of the question. In the day time the awnings—good, strong,
and thick as they were, well fitted, and beautifully spread—afforded
but a poor protection against the powerful sun. From noon to three in
the afternoon one was best below to avoid a sun-stroke, which with some
appeared imminent.

The ship was greatly over-crowded with passengers; all invalids, and many
of them in a most critical position. There was abundance of discontent,
but those on board the vessel were not at all to blame; everything the
vessel afforded was dealt out with a liberal hand, and from Captain
Cooper, the commodore of the line, to the youngest subordinate, all was
attention and civility.

Soon after passing Perim we sighted the comet, and this afforded a
subject of wonder and conversation to all. Two days before arriving at
Suez, the coals in the bunkers ignited, and the fire was kept down by
large applications of water; but the matter was well concealed by the
officers of the “Simla,” and I believe that few of those on board were
aware of the great danger we were in at one time.

We arrived at Suez on the morning of the 6th October, and the “Columbia”
arrived a few hours after us, with the Australian mails and passengers.
As it was telegraphed from Alexandria that the steamer of the Australian
line was at anchor in that harbour, and the Peninsular and Oriental
steamer had not arrived, of course the “Australians” got the preference,
and the “Indians” had to wait until the former were despatched by train.

By a succession of blunders, caused by the _employés_ on shore, we had
neither lunch nor dinner on board the “Simla;” and as we were all hurried
to our breakfast at six o’clock in the morning, we were in want of some
refreshment on landing at Suez at 4 P.M.

At the hotel they could have given us some dinner, but the railway people
told them that a sumptuous entertainment was provided on the road.

The railroad not being finished to Suez, we had to perform some portion
of the journey in two-wheeled machines, very similar to those used in
England for sea-bathing. Each of these machines contained six persons,
and they were drawn by two horses in the shafts and two mules for
leaders. There were about thirty of these machines to start together,
and having formed our party of six, we took possession of one of these
vehicles.

All being ready we started off together, amidst a shouting, yelling,
cheering, and general vociferation. The vehicles had each a guard and
driver, the duty of the guard being to keep company with the mules, and
urge them to the utmost speed.

The animals were allowed to breathe about every half hour, after which a
general race took place until the next resting-place. At last, some time
after dark, when we all began to think that we were going on to Cairo in
these vehicles without any rest, we suddenly came to a stand-still in the
midst of the desert.

The horses were taken out, and as these carriages would not remain
upright on the two wheels, we were obliged to turn out. It was very cold,
and all that could be seen of a railroad was one single line of rails in
the sand.

There were a number of small low canvas tents pitched closely adjoining,
but these were for some troops which were expected by the approaching
train. We had only to walk about and keep ourselves warm the best way we
could; it was very trying for the ladies, and, indeed, for all who were
more or less invalids. Some foolish people asked for dinner, and all for
the train. After exercising two hours’ patience, a long train made its
appearance; but instead of proceeding as soon as we were seated, the
officials told us that they dare not start without 2,500 packages of raw
silk which the camels were bringing up from Suez. About ten o’clock a
long string of these patient, wearied beasts made their appearance, and
a little after midnight the train was loaded. At one in the morning we
started; and while the train was progressing it was amusing to hear these
hungry people in their dreams apparently enjoying the most sumptuous
banquets. After a journey of one hour the train stopped, and we found
large tents containing refreshment, which consisted of one dish, being a
description of hash made of camel and vegetables of every variety. Those
who could eat this did so, and those who could not, and there were very
many, went without.

One hour was allowed for refreshment and then we renewed our journey. In
another hour we stopped, the reason for which only a few of the initiated
learned. The engineer wanted his supper, and pulled up at his “cabin in
the desert.” Here we remained two good hours, while the guard and driver
were refreshing themselves on good Irish stew. Some of the passengers
induced them to supply their wants, and were very liberal in rewarding
them in consequence.

The next morning early we arrived at Cairo, and fortunately we obtained
rooms at Shepherd’s Hotel, so justly celebrated for its comfort and
economy. Many of the passengers suffered severely from the previous
twenty-four hours, myself among the number. However, although threatened
with an attack of fever, I managed to get into the train again at 2
P.M., when it started for the Nile; here we crossed in a steamer, where
we came in contact with the “Australians,” whom we had overtaken. The
mixing of the two descriptions of people was quite amusing. The haughty
soldier, the wealthy planter, and the skilful diplomatists, side by side
with the successful miner, the wealthy publican, and the colonial adept.
The former marked by the lightness and simplicity of their garments,
while the latter were bedecked with massive and ostentatious jewellery
sufficient to pay their ransom if seized by the sons of the desert. The
Australians all had private feuds, and it was with difficulty that at
times they could be prevented from renewing them as the accidents of the
journey brought them into collision with each other.

At last we arrived at Alexandria, and finding that H.M. Consul-General
had received no telegram forbidding my pushing on to England, I felt
bound to continue by the most direct route,—and proceeded by way of
Malta, Marseilles, and Paris, arriving in London on 17th day of October,
when, twenty minutes after I got out of the train, I reported myself at
the Foreign Office.

The subsequent history of the “Charles et Georges” is a matter of public
notoriety, and so here I end my narrative.




CHAPTER IX.

ON THE RESOURCES OF EASTERN AFRICA.

    “Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.”

                                             _Psalm LXVIII., v. 31._


In the foregoing pages of this work, attention has been drawn to the
capabilities which East Africa offers, on its coast line, for the
production of the finest cotton, by the fact of its whole sea-board
being washed by that great ocean-current which subsequently, in its
course on the east coast of America, obtains the name of the Gulf Stream.
The wonderful effect which the heat contained in this great body of
water has on the climate of England, and other more torridly-situated
countries, is a fact too well attested to be disputed. For my present
purpose it will be simply necessary for me to state that the long and
beautiful staple of the sea-island cotton is produced by the warm yet
humid atmosphere arising from the Gulf Stream, accompanied by the saline
breezes on the islands and coast of America; and similarly that cotton
of the sea-island quality may be likewise produced on the east coast of
Africa, and the islands of the Ethiopian archipelago, bathed by this
great oceanic current. In proof of which, I would point to the cotton now
grown on the Seychelles, and also to that produced on the coast line of
the British colony of Natal.

Labour along the whole of the east sea-board of Africa has, for more
than three hundred years, been found in such abundance that it has
been forcibly transported to the great continent of America and the
neighbouring Antilles.

So permanent and profitable has this supply of labour been to the
western inter-tropical portion of the earth, that the Europeans, Arabs,
and Asiatics, located on the east sea-board of Africa, have neglected
to develop the resources of the country where nature is so prolific,
and have confined their attention to speedily enriching themselves, and
retiring to more healthy parts of the globe, to enjoy those riches which
they have rapidly amassed by supplying labour for less densely populated
portions of the world.

Since 1834, when England so resolutely took her stand at the head of
the nations progressing in humanity and civilization, by paying twenty
millions sterling for the liberation of her slaves, a gradual but visible
change for the better has taken place in the state of the natives of
Eastern Africa and the neighbouring archipelago.

In Mauritius slavery has entirely ceased, so also in its dependency of
the Seychelles.

Madagascar has had the gospel of Jesus Christ preached on its soil; the
germ of civilization has been planted in that extensive island; and the
slave-trade is no longer tolerated among the Malagasy people.

In the African dominions of the Imâm of Muskat the slave-trade is
forbidden; spice-gardens have arisen, the cocoa-nut is cultivated, and
large exports of simsim seed annually take place.

In the south-eastern portion of the continent the small but
rapidly-developing British colony of Natal has been established, forming
a nucleus of civilization, which is already beginning to have a visible
effect on the amelioration of the state of the natives of that portion of
Africa.

The discoveries of Dr. Livingstone have drawn attention to the vast
interior of that continent, to which access may be obtained by the
Zambesi and other rivers, which are soon destined to become highways
of commerce and civilization; while recent events on the east coast of
Africa have arrested the attention of civilized communities, and commerce
seeks for instruction as to the productions of this portion of the world,
in order that with her enterprise and fostering care the nations of that
continent may be brought into close connection with the other portions of
our globe.

I have already, in the course of these pages, touched upon the
productions of Eastern Africa, following the coast as high as the city of
Mozambique, and I propose now briefly continuing that account as far as
Cape Guardafui, and thence up the Red Sea to Suez.

The natives from the far interior bring down to Messuril, on the
mainland, opposite the city of Mozambique, every year, gold, silver,
ivory, wax, skins, and malachite, the latter in considerable
quantities—showing that there are mines of copper in the Monomoises’
country.

In 1856 many of these natives who came down to trade were seized by the
Portuguese to supply the (so-called) French Free-Labour Emigration, since
which occurrence they have not made their appearance at Messuril.

When Mozambique was in the hands of the Arabs, an important trade was
carried on between it, Arabia, and India; but for the last two hundred
years, under its present rulers, the trade, principally carried on by
Banyans to Cutch and Goâ, has been gradually decreasing.

At present it exports ivory, annually two hundred and fifty thousand
pounds, bees-wax, sesame seed, orchella, rhinoceros horns, cocoa-nut
oil, castor oil, ground-nut oil, coir, arrowroot, sago, coffee,
tortoise-shell, indigo of inferior quality (from ignorance in
manufacturing it), and a spirit made from the cachu.

There are large plantations of cocoa-nut trees, which for the last three
years have been much neglected; coffee plantations, likewise in the same
position; and a coir manufactory has for the same period of time ceased
to work: all caused by the new impetus given to the slave-trade, under
the denomination of French Free-Labour Emigration, which was established
in 1854.

Some few of the residents at Mozambique I induced to clear away and
cultivate the cotton shrubs; and, with the intention of encouraging
legitimate commerce, I wrote to H.M. Ambassador in the United States,
and also to the Chamber of Commerce of Manchester, asking for the three
descriptions of cotton seeds—viz., the _Nankin_, _green seed_, and _sea
island_—intending to send the two former into the interior, and to plant
the “sea-island” on the coast, where the saline breezes from the ocean
would favour its growth.

Having discovered the mulberry tree growing close to my house on the
mainland, and that it was indigenous to the soil, I wrote to England
for eggs of the silkworm, and addressed a letter to His Excellency the
Governor of Bombay, praying his lordship to send me some eggs of the
Tussah and other moths indicated in my letter.

Similarly I drew the attention of His Excellency the Governor-general of
Mozambique to a very important discovery which I had made, and of which
the Portuguese were entirely ignorant, viz., that both the gutta-percha
tree, and also a tree yielding india-rubber, were to be found in large
numbers on the banks of the Zambesi; and after having pointed out to
him the commercial value of these trees, I begged him to issue an order
forbidding any gutta-percha trees to be cut down—but, instead, pointing
out that they should be tapped longitudinally, by which the supply would
indeed be less, but permanent; whereas, if cut down for the purpose of
extracting the juice, these trees, as at Singapore, would, in the course
of a few years, disappear.

The present enlightened Governor-general of Mozambique, Colonel Almeida,
responded to my endeavours by drawing attention to my communication
in the official bulletin, calling upon all proprietors to preserve
and increase the mulberry trees, and by inserting an article on the
gutta-percha and india-rubber trees in the Bulletin.

Ibo, in latitude 12° 20′ S. and longitude 40° 38′ E., is admirably
situated for trade. At present it is the great warehouse for slaves.

Zanzibar, the capital of the African dominions of the Imâm of Muskat, in
latitude 6° 28′ S. and longitude 39° 33′ E., exports gold, ivory, drugs,
coir, cocoa-nuts, gums, bees-wax, tortoise-shell, spice, rice from Pemba,
sesame-seed from Angoxa, and a great quantity of timber annually to the
Red Sea and Persian Gulf.

In 1818 cloves were introduced into Zanzibar from Mauritius; they thrive
so well that the cultivation of them has in a great measure superseded
that of the sugar-cane, and even the cocoa-nut.

The imports are—Surat and Dunjaree cloths from Cutch; iron, sugar, and
rice from Bombay; salt fish and ghee from Socotra; cloths, cotton,
china-ware, earthen jars, toys, and ornaments from Surat; dates from
the Gulf of Persia; ivory, drugs, bees-wax, tortoise-shell, gums, and
sesame-seed, from Angoxa and other parts of the coast. These imports may
be valued at 500,000_l._ per annum.

Mombas and Melinda are both well adapted for trade, which at one time was
of considerable importance between these places and India and Arabia;
but Melinda, in less than a century after it had been conquered by the
Portuguese, ceased to be a place of any importance.

Lamu, in latitude 2° 15′ 45″ S., and longitude 41° 1′ 5″ E., is a
place of considerable trade, more especially in hides and the general
exports from Zanzibar. Brava, in latitude 1° 6′ 40″ N. and longitude
44° 3′ E., carries on a considerable trade with India and Arabia, and a
rapidly-increasing one with America.

The exports are—hides, bullocks, horses, and camels, oil from the joints
of camels, salt beef, great varieties of the skins of wild animals, taken
by Gallas who go from Zanzibar to Cape Guardafui. Small horses, purchased
here from five to six dollars each, will realize from sixty to seventy
dollars at the Mauritius.

The Sumalis inhabit the sea coast north from the equator, round Cape
Guardafui to Zeyla; the whole of this vast extent of country is but
little known to us.

The kingdom of Kimweri, or Usambara, more generally known as the Pangany
district, is rich in produce, which may be increased to supply any
demand. The sugar-cane is very luxuriant in its growth, and forests of
magnificent timber await the woodman’s axe, with the Pangany and its
tributaries to carry it to the ocean.

Dr. Krapf, in describing one of these forests, writes, “This forest is
worth millions of money for its fine, long, and straight timber, being as
useful for ship-building as for carpentering;” and again, “We descended
into a large forest of timber, sufficient for centuries to come. The
trees are big and straight, from 70 to 100 feet in height.”

The recent discoveries of Captains Burton and Speke, in the country
immediately to the south of this, throw a new light on a region hitherto
wrapped in the deepest mystery, and give access into the far interior,
even to the Victoria Tanganyka lake, and perhaps to the sources of the
Nile.

To the northward of Malinda the river Dana, under the name of Osi,
reaches the Indian Ocean. It is stated to flow from the eastern side of
Mount Kenia; that it is navigable for boats, from the India Ocean to the
Ukambani country; that there are no rocks in the way of navigation, and
that even during the dry season the water reaches as high as a man’s
neck, while during the rains it cannot be forded. Its ordinary breadth is
two hundred yards, and it is the privilege of the people of Mbé to carry
strangers proceeding to Kikuyu, or other countries, from one bank to
another.

A small steamer placed on this river would soon open the country to
European commerce; and from the source of the Dana to that of the White
Nile can be no great distance.

By the Dana, or Kilimansi, is assuredly the most direct route for
settling the great geographical question of the sources of the Nile.

About 200 miles from Cape Guardafui lies the island of Socotra, the
principal commercial products of which are derived from the wild plants,
and are aloes and dragon’s-blood. The aloe plant (_Aloe spicata_ or
_Socotrina_) in the western districts covers the hills for many miles,
at an elevation of from 500 to 2000 feet above the plains. This aloe is
also to be found along the whole east coast of Africa, even as far south
as the Cape of Good Hope. The dragon’s-blood tree also grows on the
western portion of Socotra, at an elevation of from 800 to 2000 feet;
and, as well as the aloe, is in such abundance that at least ten times
the quantity of these drugs which at present is exported from the island
might be easily procured.

Berbera has been for centuries the outlet for north-eastern Africa, and
especially Harrar. In former times it was one of the numerous emporia of
the Arabs at the entrance of the Red Sea, and its harbour is by no means
ill-adapted for steam communication.

Zeyla, or Zeïla, if properly encouraged by the British Government, would
be a very good outport, as the descent to that place from the interior
is easier than to Massoa, and it is the best outlet of ancient Ethiopia.
It is situated opposite Aden, where steam communication would place its
productions at once in European markets.

A great trade may be carried on at Zeyla in all the produce of Abyssinia;
viz., gold, ivory, coffee, gums, musk, ostrich-feathers, neats’-foot oil
from the wild animals (quantities of it are sent to America), tallow,
hides, horns, hoofs, &c. Fairs are held at Zeyla in April and October, at
which mules are sold very cheap, and, if purchased here for Réunion and
Mauritius, they would have the advantage of avoiding the Red Sea passage.

Mocha and Jedda, in Arabia, are already too well known to require any
notice but that of their names.

Massoa, the national outport of Abyssinia, in consequence of the descent
from the interior being so easy, exports ivory, musk, wax, coffee, senna,
linseed, ostrich-feathers, &c., and carries on a large trade with Jedda.
The imports are of the value of about four hundred thousand dollars per
annum.

Suez has already become a place of vast importance, foreshadowing the
future greatness which awaits it, when the Egyptian transit shall be
completed, and leviathan ships like the “Great Eastern,” on a trunk line
to India and China, will make that port their western terminus, and Suez
and Alexandria become the emporia of the East and West.

Having thus briefly stated what articles of commerce Eastern Africa can
produce, I feel that it would be a very imperfect notice of this portion
of the earth’s productions, were I to omit the valuable islands on the
coast.

In the Mozambique Channel, Europa Island stands conspicuous, from its
central position in the southern end of this channel. At present it is
used as a place of resort for dhows from the whole of the eastern coast
of Africa, to land their cargoes of slaves, here awaiting some large
European vessel to carry them to their future place of bondage.

This island is well situated for a lighthouse and a depôt, which would
command the trade of the Mozambique Channel both on the African and the
Madagascar coasts.

On the north side there is a good anchorage, plenty of water and fuel,
fish in abundance, turtle, and also land-turtle; and the island has also
orchella weed on it. From its insular position there is an entire absence
of _miasmata_.

Reference has already been made to the Comoro Islands, Seychelles, and
Madagascar, called the Great Britain of Africa.

Having thus briefly pointed out the resources of Eastern Africa, let us
consider the best means for the development of them.

At present the mail, by way of the Atlantic Ocean, reaches the Cape of
Good Hope in thirty-five days, and Natal in forty days.

When at Mozambique in 1857, I wrote to Sir Roderick Murchison, the
President of the Royal Geographical Society, proposing that the mail
should be carried to those two British colonies by way of Aden, touching,
on the way down the east coast of Africa, at Zanzibar and Mozambique.
By this route a letter would reach Natal in twenty-five days, and the
Cape of Good Hope in thirty days. A line of light would be thrown along
the whole east coast of Africa, now darkened by the mist of ages, and
polluted by the traffic in human beings; an inter-colonial trade would be
established between the British colonies in South Africa, the Portuguese
settlements, and the rich Sumali possessions of the Imâm of Muskat, and
the slave-trade would be entirely superseded by legitimate commerce. In
the presidential address of Sir Roderick Murchison, delivered before the
Royal Geographical Society this year, mention is made of this route, and
I am in hopes that it may soon be adopted for the carriage of the mail;
more especially as the electric telegraph is now working at Aden, from
which place a steamer might convey a message to Cape Town in fourteen
days.[8]

This route once established, the merchants of the Cape and Natal could
visit Mozambique and Zanzibar, and establish houses at those places,
where they would have a good climate during seven months of the year,
which is the healthy as well as the trading season, viz., from the end of
April to the month of November. By the establishment of this route there
is nothing in the climate to prevent merchants from Europe annually
visiting their establishments, and personally supervising the prosperity
of their factories for trade.

In the accompanying chart of Eastern Africa I have laid down a series
of electric cables, as proposed by me for connecting Great Britain with
the South and East African British colonies by way of Aden. This is
by no means in advance of the requirements of the times; for, at this
moment, we are completing the telegraphic communication with London and
Bombay; and the enterprising colonists of Natal have, for more than two
years, resolved upon connecting themselves, by means of a cable, with the
neighbouring wealthy colony of Mauritius. Telegraphic communication is
fully contemplated between Graham’s Town and Petermaritzburg, the capital
of Natal, and there is nothing in the intervening space between Mauritius
and Aden, by way of the Seychelles and Abd-el-Kuri, or Cape Guardafui,
either as to distance or depth of water, to render this proposed
electric route to the Cape Colony either impracticable, _doubtful_, or
_hazardous_.

The advantages, both politically and commercially, which such a
communication will afford to the mother country, by uniting it with its
rich African colonies, through our own possessions of Aden, Seychelles,
and Mauritius, are too apparent to be dwelt upon, and of too vital
importance to British interests in the Indian Ocean to be neglected.

Along the whole of the east coast of Africa, and the island of
Madagascar, we are outstripped by the Americans, Germans, and French.

Almost the whole of the ivory-trade is now in the hands of the Americans.

Large quantities of beef are salted down on the west coast of Madagascar,
and taken to America; hides, horns, hoofs, and tallow find a ready
market there, while the French take the oils and oil-seeds. One Hamburg
house sends annually fourteen vessels to Zanzibar, ordered to call at
Mozambique since a British consul is established there, for cargoes of
cowries, with which they proceed to the rivers on the west coast of
Africa, and purchase cargoes of palm-oil.

Few British vessels are seen in these parts—as, in the first place, the
trade is unknown in England, and, secondly, British merchants consider
that, at present, there is a degree of risk and uncertainty attending
any ventures in a portion of the world where our commerce is wholly
unprotected, and where, hitherto, vessels have been seized, and redress
has been sought but not obtained.

In the proper quarter I have already suggested that, for the development
of the resources of Eastern Africa, and the opening up of a highly
remunerative trade for Great Britain, a consular officer should be
appointed from Natal to Suez, including Madagascar and the other islands
on that coast; that he should be furnished with a small steamer, which
would be entirely for the consular service—by which means the whole coast
could be constantly visited, our trade encouraged, new markets for our
manufactures made known, and our acquaintance with Eastern Africa become
more intimate in a few years than it would be in a century by any other
mode of procedure.

At first sight the expense attending a vessel for that service may
apparently cause an objection; but when we reflect upon the great results
to which such an appointment must lead, and its obviating the necessity
of a cordon of consular agents on such a coast, with the accompanying
expenses and sacrifice of valuable lives, I feel assured that the country
will cheerfully respond to the call which it is hoped the merchants of
Great Britain will make upon the legislature.

The young Prince Madji, who has inherited the rich Sumali possessions
of the late Imâm of Muskat, has declared his intentions resolutely to
follow in the steps of his great father, by discouraging and eventually
abolishing the traffic in our fellow-beings.

The facts stated in the foregoing pages of this work having been brought
under the notice of Napoleon III., by the circumstances attending the
seizure of the celebrated “CHARLES ET GEORGES,” the Emperor addressed the
following loyal letter to his cousin:—

    “To PRINCE NAPOLEON, “Minister of Algeria and the Colonies.

                                          “St. Cloud, Oct. 30, 1858.

    “MY DEAR COUSIN,

    “I have the liveliest desire that, at the moment when the
    differences with Portugal relative to the ‘Charles et Georges’
    have terminated, the question of the engagement of free
    labourers on the African coast should be definitely examined,
    and finally settled on the truest principles of humanity and
    justice. I energetically claimed from Portugal the restitution
    of the ‘Charles et Georges’ because I will always maintain
    intact the independence of the national flag; but, in this case
    even, it was only with the profound conviction of my right that
    I risked with the King of Portugal a rupture of those friendly
    relations which I am glad to maintain with him. But as to the
    principle of the engagement of the negroes, my ideas are far
    from being settled. If, in truth, labourers recruited on the
    African coast are not allowed the exercise of their free will,
    and if this enrolment is only the slave-trade in disguise, I
    will allow it on no terms; for it is not I who will anywhere
    protect enterprises contrary to progress, to humanity, and to
    civilization. I beg you, then, to seek out the truth with the
    zeal and intelligence which you bring to bear on all affairs
    about which you employ yourself. And as the best method of
    putting a stop to what is a continual cause of dispute would
    be to substitute the free labour of Indian coolies for that
    of the negroes, I beg you to come to an understanding with
    the Minister for Foreign Affairs to resume with the English
    Government the negotiations which were entered upon a few
    months ago. On this, my dear cousin, I pray God to have you in
    his holy keeping.

                                                         “NAPOLEON.”

In the above letter the Emperor Napoleon emphatically states, “If, in
truth, labourers recruited on the African coast are not allowed the
use of their free will, and if this enrolment is only the slave-trade
in disguise, I will have it on no terms; for it is not I who will
anywhere protect enterprises contrary to progress, to humanity, and
to civilization.” Admitting, on the one hand, that he may have been
deceived by those who had induced him to believe that free labour might
be obtained on the east coast of Africa without re-establishing the
slave-trade, on the other hand, he approved of that policy adopted by
Great Britain in Eastern Africa, which had for its result the thus
forcibly bringing before the world the horrors which were being renewed
by this so-called Free Labour Emigration.

No higher approval of the conduct of the British functionary who had
pursued the path of duty, undaunted by continued persecution, could have
been afforded to the world; while the subsequent decree, ordering this
traffic to cease on the east coast of Africa, proved the loyalty of
Napoleon, and prepared Europe to hail in him the liberator of Central
Italy.

The two greatest powers of Europe have resolved that Africa shall have
the opportunity of developing her own material resources; and it now only
remains for Portugal to prove that her professions for the abolition of
the slave-trade are as sincere and as loyal as the great head of the
French nation has shown his to be.

Our beloved Queen succeeded to the throne on the 20th of June, 1837,
and was crowned sovereign of these realms at Westminster, June 28,
1838. Great Britain had previously to that, in 1834, voted twenty
millions sterling for the liberation of the slaves throughout our
colonies; but still a large number of our fellow-beings groaned in
slavery under the apprenticeship system. On the 1st of August, 1838,
the first returning anniversary, after the Queen’s coronation, of that
auspicious day when the house of Brunswick ascended the throne of these
realms, the world beheld the sublime spectacle of the Virgin Queen of
Great Britain pronouncing on earth the will of heaven, that—Slavery in
every form should cease where Britain ruled; and Queen Victoria, on
that day, made eight hundred thousand _slaves_ eight hundred thousand
loyal subjects—thus inseparably uniting the HOUSE OF BRUNSWICK with the
imperishable monument of ENGLAND’S GREATEST DEED.

In distant ages, when the glories of the “Isles of the West” are told,
the memory of BOADICEA, the Queen of the British Iceni, who boldly met
the invading Roman legions, may be forgotten; so, likewise, that of
QUEEN ELIZABETH and the Spanish Armada may fade from the memory of man;
but while the world lasts, and humanity has a heart for other’s woes, the
tale of VICTORIA AND THE SLAVE shall not pass away, while generations yet
unborn will exclaim: “Blessed art thou among women.”

With such an inspiring example before him, is it possible that the young
King of Portugal can pause in the course which duty, interest, and
humanity alike dictate? No! Dom Pedro the Fifth will now see slavery as
it exists in his African dominions; his decree will go forth that slavery
shall cease wherever the Portuguese flag flies; he will thus ally the
House of BRAGANZA with that of BRUNSWICK by ties more indissoluble than
those of blood—namely, the memory of good deeds. The curse of slavery
shall pass away from his land; Portugal will again resume her position
among the first powers of civilization, and admiring posterity will point
to Dom Pedro the Fifth as the regenerator of Portugal and the saviour of
Africa.




APPENDIX.


A.

The reader’s attention is called to the following note from “Buxton on
the Slave-trade,” London, 1839, in connection with the accompanying
notice of trees, shrubs, and plants to be found on the Zambesi:—

“Many beautiful kinds of wood have been discovered by accident amongst
the billets of fire-wood brought home in the slave-ships of Liverpool.
Mr. Clarkson gives the following anecdote in his ‘Impolicy of the
Slave-Trade.’ After mentioning the tulip-wood, and others found in this
manner, he says:—‘About the same time in which this log was discovered
(A.D. 1787), another wood vessel, belonging to the same port, brought
home the specimen of the bark of a tree that produced a very valuable
yellow dye, and far beyond any other ever in use in this country. The
virtues of it were discovered in the following manner:—A gentleman
resident upon the coast ordered some wood to be cut down to erect a
hut. While the people were felling it he was standing by; during the
operation some juice flew from the bark of it, and stained one of the
ruffles of his shirt. He thought that the stain would have washed out,
but, on wearing it again, found that the yellow spot was much more
bright and beautiful than before, and that it gained in lustre every
subsequent time of washing. Pleased with the discovery, which he knew to
be of so much importance to the manufacturers of Great Britain, and for
which a considerable premium had been offered, he sent home the bark now
mentioned as a specimen. He is since, unfortunately, dead, and little
hopes are to be entertained of falling in with this tree again, unless a
similar accident should discover it, or a change should take place in our
commercial concerns with Africa.

“I shall now mention another valuable wood, which, like all those that
have been pointed out, was discovered by accident in the same year.
Another wood vessel, belonging to the same port, was discharging her
cargo; among the barwood a small billet was discovered, the colour of
which was so superior to that of the rest, as to lead the observer to
suspect that it was of a very different species, though it is clear
that the natives, by cutting it off the same size and dimensions, and
by bringing it on board at the same time, had, on account of its red
colour, mistaken it for the other. One half of the billet was cut away in
experiments. It was found to produce a colour that emulated the carmine,
and was deemed to be so valuable in the dyeing trade, that an offer was
immediately made of sixty guineas per ton for any quantity that could
be procured. The other half has been since sent back to the coast, as a
guide to collect more of the same sort, though it is a matter of doubt
whether, under the circumstances that have been related, the same tree
can be ascertained again.” P. 9.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE VARIOUS TREES, BUSHES, HERBS, AND PLANTS of a
Medicinal character to be found about the town of Tete; with an account
of the application which the natives of the country make of them, for the
mechanical uses of life, and in the treatment of the diseases to which
they are subject:—

The town of Tete is situated sixty leagues N.W. of the town of Seña,
which is also sixty leagues from the town of Killimane, built on the
northern mouth of the river Zambesi, which discharges itself into the
Indian Ocean on the east coast of Africa.[9]


TREES.

_Muxetéco_, or root of St. Augustine, as it is called at Mozambique.—The
flower of this tree, which blooms in the months of November and December,
is small, of a yellow colour, and sweet scented. It produces pods of the
colour of cinnamon, more than two and a half spans in length; the beans
inside are of the size of the tamarind stone. These pods, after being
dried, are used for torches by the natives when entering caves in search
of the porcupine. An infusion of the bark of the tree is applied in cases
of indigestion, toothaches, colics, vomits, and also as a healing wash
for wounds. It is used to promote menstruation.

_Mucorongo._—This tree is called jambalaõ in Inhambane. The flower is
white, round, and like that of the mangoe-tree, or elder-tree. From the
fruit both wine and vinegar are made. Its fruit, which is eaten, is
like that of the olive of Elvas, in Portugal; and, when ripe, it is the
colour of red wine. The juice of the fruit is also of the same colour. A
decoction of the root used in a hip bath is a remedy for hemorrhoids, and
checks purgations (anti-cathartic?) Cut up into small pieces and strung
on a thread, like beads, it is worn round the neck, as a remedy for
ophthalmia.

_Mutarára._—This tree is found principally in the sand-hills of Muxem.
The flower is very small, and of the same colour as the leaves. The fruit
is of the size of the Agriote (sour cherry), and of a yellow colour, when
ripe and fit to be eaten; the skin is very coarse, the seed round, and
the colour of red-wine. A decoction of the root is used for rinsing the
mouth, as a cure for toothache. The stems being straight and elastic, the
negroes use them in making those bows which they call Uta.

_Mupanda-panda._—A decoction of the root of this tree, made into pulp, is
applied in the shape of a poultice, as a remedy for chest diseases.

_Chirussa._—The flower is yellow, and similar to that of _casula
cheirosa_. The fruit is like the apple-seed. By rubbing the body with the
dried leaves heated, a copious perspiration is produced, which arrests
fever. A decoction of the bark pounded is used in a hip-bath, as a remedy
for tenesmus.

_Mutacha._—The flower is small, and of the colour of the dried rose. The
fruit is very sweet, and of the size of the small olive; when ripe it
assumes a yellow colour, and it is then fit to be eaten. When dry the
bark is reduced to flour, and mixed with the flour of Indian corn; it is
then used as a poultice. A decoction of the bark is used for rinsing the
mouth, as a cure for toothache. A decoction of the bark, when drank, is a
remedy for hemorrhage of the smaller veins. A decoction of the bark and
the root is used as a cure for hernia.

_Tussi_, called by the natives of India “Curo.”—The fruit of this tree is
in the form of very long pods, within which there is a species of cotton
or down. The natives of the country and Banyans attribute to it the same
effects and virtues as cinchona, and therefore give a decoction of the
bark to those who have fever, which is also used as a healing wash for
wounds.

_Mupumpua._—The root of this tree is applied as a cure for bubos and
gonorrhœa, by drinking the water in which it has been steeped.

_Goóo._—The flower is small and yellow. The fruit is the size of a small
grain, and in clusters. The negroes use this fruit in proving cases of
feiticeros (witchcraft), for which purpose they pound the peel, mix it
with cold water, then strain it; and after it has assumed a darkish
shade they add a portion of boiling water, making it just drinkable.
Two, three, and even five gamellas (bowls) full are given to drink to
the person under trial. Should it act as a purgative the accused is
pronounced guilty, and punished as a feitecera. On the other hand, if
it acts as an emetic, the accused is acquitted. This judicial proof is
called by the negroes Muavi or Lucasse.

_Mutóa._—This tree is the height of an orange-tree. The leaves are long.
The bark resembles that of the cork-tree in colour and thickness. A
species of milk is extracted from the trunk and branches by making an
incision. The wood is very oily, and the Cazembé and the Regulos Maraves
use it cut up into lengths like candles, which they use as lights.

_Nhamucu-ucúu._—The bark of this tree, reduced to powder and used in the
way of snuff, is an efficacious remedy for giddiness; and the same effect
is caused by a decoction of the leaves, when applied to the head as a
sudorific.

_Musequesse._—The leaf of this tree resembles that of the vine. The
full-grown leaves are applied to heal wounds; and an infusion of the
young leaves is used in chest complaints. The bark is thick, and very
much cracked; it resembles that of the Goóo, and an infusion of it is
drunk as an antidote for the Goóo prepared for the Muravi or Lucasse.

_Mudáma._—The flower is of a white colour; leaves rough, large, and
stiff. The juice of the leaves mixed with cold water, when drunk, is an
efficacious remedy for the diarrhœa, with which Europeans are attacked in
that country.

_Mupubuzo._—The branches and the trunk of this tree are covered with
large and thick prickles. The negroes use the root to give the vermilion
colour to threads, cords and straw, with which they braid their hair.

_Muziquezi._—It is called in Inhambane Mafurreira, and the fruit of it is
called Mafurra. This tree is very lofty, shady, and fragile. The flower
is small, white, and similar to that of the elder-tree. The leaves are
long and narrow. The fruit is in clusters, and of the size of a small
fig; it has a strong rind, covered with down; when ripe it splits of
itself, and lets out a seed of a black colour, with vermilion eyes, from
which oil and tallow are extracted. The bark, when bruised in either hot
or cold water, assumes the colour of milk, with which the natives season
their food and make poultices. The tallow is used for curing erysipelas,
by anointing with it the inflamed part.

_Mucuiu._—Is that which in sacred history is called the sycamore tree.
The tree itself, and its mode of fructification, resemble the fig-tree,
with this difference—that the fruit is smaller, and indigestible. The
water in which its root has been steeped, when drunk, cures colics and
palpitation of the heart. The powder of the root, dried in the sun, mixed
with any liquid, produces the same effects.

_Canunca-utare._—Its roots are orange colour, and have the property of
driving away snakes by the pungency of the smell, for which purpose they
are used.

_Mucuniti._—The flower is like that of the lemon-tree, with the
difference of being long. The fruit is round and small. The wood is of
a purple colour, and is most excellent for cabinet work. It is very
sweet-scented, and the roots more so.

_Fundi._—This is a species of palm-tree. The leaves are long and narrow
like grass, with lines running the length of them. The leaves are used
for making brooms and brushes. In Zumbo the Caffres use the leaves to
stop the leaks in their vessels.

_Mussonzóa._—The fruit of this tree is like the gall-nut, with this
difference, that it has no prickles upon it. It produces the same
effects. The Caffre women use it for dyeing cloth a black colour, in
the following manner:—The fruit is well pounded, and gradually mixed up
with a kind of black earth, known to them, which has in it particles of
copper. It makes a very black fixed dye. Poultices made of the roots are
applied in cases of hernia, which it cures very quickly.

_Mussio._—The nature of this tree is very much like that of the acacia
in leaf, spines, and flower, with the difference of not being scented.
It produces a species of bean called quissio, which the natives use in
the same way as the fruit of the Mussonzóa. As these beans are very
astringent, wounds are washed with the water in which they have been
steeped.

_Mutengueni_, called by the natives of India “_Nino_.”—This bush, which
flourishes in the months of November and December, has a small white
long flower, which, when it opens, presents the fruit called Tengueni,
which is the size of an almond. When ripe and fit to be open, it is of a
vermilion colour; it is very acid, and the oil which is extracted from
it is used for softening skins, and also for reducing tumors. The leaves
reduced to powder, and mixed with the juice of the lemon, are a cure for
troublesome ulcers; and the juice of the leaves when taken as a drink
destroys intestinal worms.

_Cangóme._—The flower and fruit of this bush are like that of the Mocha
coffee. The fruit serves as food for the negroes in time of famine, by
boiling it, when green, three or four times, and mixing with it, in the
last boiling, some ashes to remove the bitter taste. The powder of the
root, when dried, or of the bark when fresh, is used to cure contusions,
by laying it over the part affected. An infusion of the bark is used for
the cure of sores of long standing, for which a powder of the root is
also used.

_Canémbe-Numbe._—The flower is yellow, and resembles much that of the
Muxetero. It has no aroma. The fruit is in pods of half a palm in length,
which are eaten when tender. An infusion of the root is a strong diuretic.

_Catungúro._—The flower is a bright yellow, and resembles tassels of
fringe. The fruit, when ripe, is the colour and size of the lemon.
The root is of the consistency of the common potatoe; when cut into
pieces, dried in the sun, and reduced to powder, it is applied to the
cure of bubos. Bubos are also cured by washing them with an infusion of
the root when it is fresh. The leaves pounded are used in the cure of
wounds caused by blows; and the boiled leaves applied to the head, as a
sudorific, are a cure for mistiness and cataracts of the eyes. Also, the
root when fresh, pounded, and thrown into a lake, destroys all the fish
in it.

_Tindinhava Sensitiva._—The flower forms first a small bud like the
pine-apple, of the size of a small seed, which gradually opens, and forms
a suspiro of a brown colour, having the tops of the stamens of a pale
green colour. The fruit is in pods, flat, of two inches in length, or
a little less, snuff-coloured, and covered with down. It is found near
brooks, and on banks of rivers. On touching the leaves, they contract as
far as the tremour of the touch extends. The root is very soft, and when
tied over an inflamed part of the body it removes the swelling. Baths of
the bark pounded and boiled are used for erysipelas.

_Mutava-Nherere._—The name of Nhere which this bears implies that it
is persecuted by ants. The flower is yellow, similar to that of the
ganalinho. The fruit is the size of the mad-apple. They grow in clusters.
The leaves pounded are applied in cases of pleurisy, when they act as a
blister. A decoction of the roots is applied in hip-baths as a remedy for
diarrhœa.

_Mutavan-sato._—The flower is similar to that of the apple-tree. The
fruit is small, and always surrounded by leaves. The juice of the leaves,
mixed with water and taken daily, cures diseases of the spleen. An
infusion of the root is used to rinse the mouth, as a cure for toothache.

_Buaze._—The flowers of this bush are small, and of the form of
guergelin. These flowers swell like the pepper of India. The leaves are
small. The seed is properly linseed, both in size, colour, and form. The
negroes make use of the thread which it gives to form their fishing,
hunting, and bird-nets. In short, it has a perfect resemblance to the
flax which is manufactured in Europe.

_Mudia-coro._—Mudia signifies “that which eats;” coro, “macaca,” monkey.
The leaves are white on the under side, as if they had been sprinkled
with lime or ashes. The root is used by the negroes, either by chewing
it, infusing it, or by drying it in the sun, and reducing it to powder,
when it is mixed with their pombe. It has the same effect as cantharides,
and is taken internally for the same purpose.

_Titifiti._—This bush is to be found in marshy places, upon the banks
of rivers and rivulets. The leaf resembles that of the carmagasuro, and
it is very aromatic. Of it, and of other herbs and plants, a decoction
is made and applied in hip-baths to those who suffer from tenesmus. A
decoction of the leaf is used as a sudorific, and produces a very copious
perspiration. The root cut in small pieces, and worn about the neck like
beads, is a remedy for nervous attacks. And for greater efficacy in this
respect the bedroom ought to be fumigated with the root and leaves of
this bush.

_Capande._—The flower is small, and inclining to purple in colour. The
seed is of the size of the agriote, and similar to the fruit of the
matarara. The Caffres use this bush as a muavi (an oath of judicial
proof among them), prepared in the same manner as the goóo, which also
is muavi among them, as already stated. An infusion of the root is
applied to the fever itáca—causing a copious perspiration—having a very
beneficial effect. The powder of the root, dried in the sun, is used as
snuff, giving great relief in severe colds.

_Enteca._—This is the same as capande in its characteristics and its
effects.

_Carangasúro._—This herb has a yellow flower similar to camomile. A
decoction of it is as a sudorific in a hip-bath to those who suffer from
tenesmus. Mixing it with the herb cacici, or escorcioneira, and with the
roots of the bush capande, and applying the mixture as a sudorific, fever
is alleviated.

_Cacici camuzuqua_, or _escorcioneira_.—There are two qualities of this
herb—one large, the other small. The flower is yellow, and very minute
in proportion to the size of the leaves. It resembles the saffron of
Portugal. The fruit is of the size of a small bead. A decoction of the
leaves is applied as a sudorific to the head in cases of headache. The
bark of the root, boiled along with the root of wild endive, and drunk,
arrests fevers in their progress towards the malignant stage. A simple
decoction of the root is applied to tertian fevers; and, when mixed with
that of the root of the mucoronga, is applied in cases of complicated
gonorrhœa.

_Cacici camuzuqua pequena_, or _escorcioneira menor_.—By anointing the
body with a decoction of the root of this herb, mixed with the filings
of ivory, orange peel, and leaves of the orange-tree, pounded, fever is
destroyed.

_Avenca._—A plant well-known among the negroes, but it does not seem to
be made any use of by them.

_Munhaze._—The leaves are oily and sticky. The negroes use the root in
the composition of the oil of Friar Pedro, which has the property of
drawing the poison out of a wound made by a poisoned arrow.

_Uombue._—This herb has broad leaves like a gourd, but at the same time
long and very hairy. It produces a potatoe very large, which, when
pounded and thrown in water where fish are, destroys them. A poultice of
the root pounded, applied to pleurisies, destroys the pain.

_Casuzumire._—It is a very small herb like mint. A decoction of it used
in baths is a remedy for hemorrhoids and diarrhœa.

_Cacumate._—This herb has the appearance of the claws of the sparrow-hawk
when dead. A decoction is applied to intermittent fevers, and fevers
produced by fatigue. The negroes place it in vessels in which their young
animals drink, through a superstition which they have, that the leaves
being shrunk and similar to the claws of the sparrow-hawk, their young
birds or poultry which drink this water will never be taken by the kite,
sparrow-hawk, or any other bird of prey.

_Mudossua; figueiro do inferno_ (the fig-tree of Hell, Palma
Christi.)—The flower of this plant is large, white, and funnel-shaped.
The fruit like the poppy of Amphiaõ, with the difference of having spines
or prickles like the pipons of St. Gregory (wild cucumber). It is always
in leaf, and the leaves are applied entire as plasters in the cure of
scalds. They have the property of eating away corrupt flesh. From the
kernel of the poppy an oil is extracted, which, mixed with any liquid,
produces sleep. In short, it produces the same effect as laudanum.

_Bange, é o canamo de Portugal_ (the hemp of Portugal).—The negroes, at
the time this plant begins to wither, collect it, stalk by stalk, and
make it into bundles. They smoke it through water, and then drink the
water through which the smoke has passed, which immediately acts as an
emetic. The natives of the interior cultivate it in their villages; and
there are some, as the Morenges, who smoke it with a mixture of tobacco,
long pepper, and galinhaça, which makes them very nervous. The smoke of
the leaves and seed received into the eyes cures _belida_, or web, that
grows over the eye.[10]

_Conge._—This plant is what in Brazil is called Pita. The negroes of
Muzezuro, a part of the interior where gold is found, work it into thread
to make clothes for covering themselves, and the Zimbas, a people of
Zimbave, as also the Caffres, make nets of it for hunting and fishing.

_Inhafoncori._—This plant grows in stems, or stalks, straight and scaly.
The leaves are very small, and resemble those of purslane; although dry,
when made into an infusion they recover their green colour. An infusion
of it is employed for pectoral diseases.

_Carúco-ruco._ The flower is small, and of a light yellow colour. The
fruit is always in pairs, and similar to the fruit of the panheira. After
it is ripe it opens and gives out a yellow down, which is a species of
cotton. The two parts of the shell of the fruit remain like two spoons,
hence the name “carúco-ruco,” which signifies “small spoons.” The root
when dried in the sun is made into a powder, and is used as a remedy for
venereal sores, by sprinkling it over them. A decoction of the root is
used for rinsing the mouth as a cure for toothache.

_Combe._—This climbing plant has a long fruit, more than a span in
length; it has a strong shell like an almond. The fruit grows in pairs,
and the interior of the fruit contains small beans; and in the spaces
between the beans there is a kind of small hair, which, combined with the
said beans and reduced to powder, is mixed with the gall of the alligator
and that of the cobra capella; this mixture is employed to poison arrows
and lances. This poison is so powerful that when any animal is wounded
with an arrow or lance prepared with this poison, it dies in less than
half an hour, through the subtilty of the poison, which immediately
passes through every part of the body, leaving the injured part quite
black.

_Mupessa._—A wild fig-tree, the fruit of which is somewhat acid, and
of a purple colour. A decoction of the root is applied to the cure of
pleurisy, by drinking it; also by placing on the part affected the root
boiled and softened in vinegar. The same decoction is also employed to
reduce apostumes; swellings caused by falls; to expel after-births; to
remove the pains of colics; and also for gonorrhœa.

_Mutubzi._—The flower is round, and of a yellow colour. The fruit is
flat, and one bean only. A decoction of the flower is applied in cases of
tenesmus, flux, &c. It is also used as a sort of gruel for sick people.
This plant has an insufferable smell.

_Abutua._—The root of this creeping plant, made into pombe, is given as
a drink to those who have received injuries from severe falls. The same
pombe heated is applied as a plaster over the inflamed part.


B.

TIMBER TO BE FOUND IN EASTERN AFRICA, MADAGASCAR, AND THE SEYCHELLES.

List of specimens of Woods from the River Zambesi, to be seen at the
rooms of the Royal Geographical Society, 15, Whitehall-place:—

1. _Inhampásse._—Planks six feet long, eight inches broad, and three
inches thick, may be procured.

2. _Pingué—ou Páo preto_ (beautiful wood)—Six feet in length, and six
inches square.

3. _Mocua._—About fourteen feet in length, eight to ten inches square;
and, from its being forked, is peculiarly adapted for knees and futtocks
in ship-building.

4. _Imbila._—From fifteen to eighteen feet long, twelve inches square; a
very flexible wood for ship-building purposes.

5. _Muramanhâma._—About eighteen feet in length, twelve inches square,
and bright red in colour.

6. _Mocunca._—Fifteen to eighteen feet in length, eight to ten inches
square; grows crooked, and well adapted for the tiers of wheels.

7. _Mocôzo._—From thirty-five to forty-five feet in length, three to
four feet square; this wood is of a canary colour, which dyes cotton,
silk, and wool that colour, without any other preparation than by simply
pouring boiling water on it.

8. _Mucunite_—Or sandal wood; planks six to eight feet in length, and
eight inches broad, but the greater part of it is not straight.

9. _Pumburo._—This is a sort of shrub, which does not exceed the
thickness of one’s arm, including the white part which surrounds the
heart, from which a colouring matter, gold colour, is extracted; and from
the white part a canary colour, by simply infusing in water, is given to
silk, cotton, and wool.

10. _Peám._—Eighteen feet long, sixteen inches square.

11. _Mussangara._—Twelve feet long, not very straight, ten inches square.

12. _Taxa._—Twenty feet in length, twenty inches square.

13. _Mocundo-cundo._—Thirty-six feet in length, three to four feet
square; well adapted for vessels’ masts; the bark of this tree supplies
quinine, and from the wood also quinine may be extracted.

14. _Mucorongo._—Eighteen feet long, twelve inches square.

15. _Raiz de Pingué on Páo-preto._—This is the root of the Páo-preto or
Pingué (beautiful wood) (No. 2), which is adapted for cabinet-work.

16. _Monangare._—Fifteen feet long, fifteen inches square, not very
straight, but adapted for block-making and wheelwrights.

17. _Mocossocossa._—Eighteen feet long, twenty inches square; adapted for
joiner’s work, and takes a high polish.

18. _Páo-ferro._—Iron-wood, twenty-four feet long, eight inches square;
well adapted for furniture, takes a high polish, and is suitable for
tree-nails in ship-building, and wherever it can be substituted for iron.

19. _Páo-ferro Mais escuro._—Iron-wood, of a darker quality; dimensions
as No. 18.

20. _Panguira._—Thirty feet in length, straight, twenty inches square;
well adapted for ship-building and beams of houses.

21.—_Páo-fava._—Twenty-two feet in length, straight, twelve inches square
at least.

22. _Meterral._—Twenty-four feet in length, straight, twelve inches
square.

23. _Mugunda._—Forty to sixty feet long, straight, from three to six feet
square; well adapted for ship-building.

24. _Morrondo._—Fifteen feet long, two feet square; adapted for
ship-building.

25. _Moáno._—Fifteen feet long, twelve inches square; generally straight.

26. _Luabo._—Twelve feet long, and ten inches square.

In addition to the above specimens of wood brought home by me, Dr.
Livingstone has found teak, or African oak, as well as lignum-vitæ, on
his way up to Tete.


LIST OF WOODS TO BE FOUND ON THE ISLAND OF MADAGASCAR.

Red Tacamaca, ninety feet long; Colofan, of great length. Red Tacamaca
and Colofan are impervious to the Teredo Navalis, and they may both be
easily obtained, and in any quantity, on the north-east end of Madagascar.

The Bois de natte.

The Faux gaiac.

Sandal-wood and ebony—also a very valuable wood; iron and steel
instruments inserted in which will not corrode.

On the west side of Madagascar, from Bombatok to the north, opposite
Nossi-Bé, rosewood and ebony abound.


NOTES ON THE WOODS OF THE SEYCHELLES.

Specimens of which are to be seen at the rooms of the Royal Geographical
Society, 15, Whitehall-place.

Tacamaca red; tacamaca white.

The bois de natte, both descriptions—the large and the small leaf.

Olive-wood.

The faux gaiac, which is as strong and durable as iron.

Sandal-wood; bonnet carré; l’arbre à pommes de suisse; ebony; rosewood;
the filao; le badinier; le ledanier; le var; le rima; the white acajou;
l’ontelier; le capucin; l’arequier; l’arbre fougère; and the vacoa.

Many of these trees are of great grandeur, and of immense size.

With tacamaca canoes are made in one piece, twenty-four, thirty, and
thirty-six feet in length, and five to six feet beam.

Many vessels have been built at these islands; see the report on the
“Thomas Blyth.”

                                    “Admiralty, 19th February, 1859.

    “SIR,—In pursuance of the directions of the Lords Commissioners
    of the Admiralty, I transmit herewith a copy of a report,
    dated the 11th instant, from the timber-inspector at Woolwich
    Dock-yard, on the specimens of woods from the Zambesi, the
    Seychelles, and Madagascar, presented by you to the Royal
    Geographical Society; and, with reference to the specimens
    numbered in the enclosed Report, 12, 17, 21, and 22, from the
    Zambesi, and 17, 18, and 19 from Seychelles, I have to request
    you will state, after being so obliging as to confer with me
    on the subject, what steps you would recommend should be taken
    for obtaining a supply of these descriptions of timber, and for
    conveying the same to England.—I am, Sir, your humble servant,

                                   “R. DUNDAS,
                                   “Storekeeper-General of the Navy.

    “TO LYONS M’LEOD, ESQ., Late H.M. Consul at Mozambique.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                 “Woolwich Dock-yard, Feb. 11, 1859.

    “SIR,—I have the honour to report, that, in obedience to
    your order of the 2nd instant, I visited the rooms of the
    Royal Geographical Society, and inspected the under-mentioned
    specimens of woods brought from Mozambique by Mr. M’Leod, late
    H.M. Consul there:—

    “1. Inhampásse; 2. Pingué ou Páo-preto; 3. Mocua; 4.
    Imbila; 5. Muramanhâma; 6. Mocunca; 7. Mocôzo; 8. Mucunite,
    or sandal-wood; 9. Pumburo; 10. Peám; 11. Mussangara; 12.
    Taxa; 13. Mocundo-cundo; 14. Mucorongo; 15. Raiz de Pingué on
    Páo-preto; 16. Monangare; 17. Mocosso-cosso; 18. Páo-ferro,
    iron-wood; 19. Páo-ferro mais escuro; 20. Panguira; 21. Páo
    fava; 22. Metteral; 23. Mugunda; 24. Morrondo; 25. Moána; 26.
    Luabo.

    “After a careful examination of the above specimens, I find
    they may be classed as follows:—

    “1st. All those which are of small dimensions, and do not
    attain in their growth the size of timber-trees, but, being of
    good quality, may be useful for local purposes—such are Nos. 1,
    2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 15, 16, 18, 19, 25, and 26.

    “2nd. Those which are of small dimensions, and do not attain to
    the character of timber-trees, and, being of inferior quality,
    are not likely to be of any value in manufacture—such are Nos.
    4, 5, 10, 11, and 14.

    “3rd. All those trees of finer growth and nobler dimensions,
    the quality of which is inferior, and apparently not of a
    durable character—of this class are Nos. 7, 13, 20, 23, and 24.

    “4th. The woods of good quality which just attain in their
    growth the minimum of length which would fit them for naval
    purposes—these are Nos. 12, 17, 21, and 22.

    “Assuming that the character of the woods enumerated in classes
    1 and 2 are sufficiently explained, it will only be necessary
    to remark further, that in determining their classes I have
    been guided by the dimensions given me by Mr. M’Leod, and that
    I have taken these for my data throughout.

    “Class 3 requires a fuller notice, as the trees are reported to
    be of large growth.

    “No. 7, Mocôzo, produces timber thirty-five to forty-five feet
    in length, and from three to four feet square; its specific
    gravity is about forty-seven pounds; it is of yellowish colour,
    and is said to possess dyeing properties; the wood is porous,
    and inferior in quality.

    “No. 13, Mocundo-cundo, produces timber thirty-six feet in
    length, and from three to four feet square; its specific
    gravity is about forty-one pounds. The wood is yellow in
    colour, porous, and inferior in quality. From the bark of this
    tree quinine is extracted.

    “No. 20, Panguira, produces timber thirty feet in length,
    and will square about twenty inches; its specific gravity is
    fifty-three pounds; the wood is of a dark brown colour, porous,
    and inferior in quality. It is, however, stated to be used at
    Mozambique for both house and ship-building purposes.

    “No. 23, Mugunda, produces timber forty to sixty feet in
    length, and squaring from three to six feet; its specific
    gravity is thirty-eight pounds; it is of straight growth,
    yellowish in colour, light, porous, and inferior in quality.

    “No. 24, Morrondo, produces timber fifteen feet in length, and
    two feet square; its specific gravity is about forty-seven
    pounds; the wood is yellowish in colour, porous, and apparently
    inferior in quality; it is stated to be used for ship-building
    purposes at Mozambique.

    “There is, probably, some mistake, either as to length, or in
    the size, given for this tree, and in some others, as they do
    not appear proportionate.

    “Class 4 appear to be trees of a more useful description.

    “No. 12, Taxa, produces timber twenty feet in length, and
    twenty inches square; its specific gravity is about sixty-seven
    pounds; the wood is close in the grain, heavy, of a reddish
    colour, and apparently of good and durable character. I have no
    information as to whether it has been used at the Mozambique
    for any purpose; but it might be taken as a substitute for
    African oak, or sabian, in ship-building, if greater lengths
    can be found, as would seem probable, if it square up to twenty
    inches.

    “No. 17, Mocosso-cosso, produces timber eighteen feet in
    length, and twenty inches square; its specific gravity is
    fifty-nine pounds; it is a little lighter in colour than
    mahogany, and somewhat resembles that wood in its grain; it
    might be used as a substitute for it in ship-building and
    cabinet-work; its quality is apparently good, and, if greater
    lengths are procurable, would be valuable.

    “No. 21, Páo-fava, produces timber twenty-two feet in length,
    and twelve inches square; its specific gravity is forty-eight
    pounds; it is of straight growth, has a fine clear grain, and
    is apparently of good quality, it may be used as a substitute
    for mahogany.

    “No. 22, Metteral, produces timber twenty-four feet in length,
    and twelve inches square; its specific gravity is fifty-six
    pounds; it is darker in colour than the Páo-fava, heavier, and
    better in quality; it may be used as a substitute for mahogany
    in ship-building and cabinet-work.

    “It is somewhat remarkable that among the trees of the largest
    growth they should nearly all be found of inferior quality, and
    apparently liable to early decay—yet such is their character,
    when considered in reference to the specimens examined.

    “The trees of more moderate dimensions assume a better
    character, and if greater lengths, in proportion to the given
    diameter, can be obtained in the Taxa and the Mocosso-cosso,
    they would be found useful for beams, keelsons, &c. The
    Páo-fava and the Metteral are both very good woods, but
    an increased length and size is wanting to give them value
    for beams, planks, &c. Further information is needed from
    Mozambique on these four last-named woods, us to whether
    greater lengths are procurable, and as to the quantities to be
    found in the forests; if these are easy obtainable in large
    quantities, and they can be brought readily to a port for
    shipment, they would be deserving of a trial in our dock-yards.

    “Mr. M’Leod states that Dr. Livingstone has found African oak
    and lignum-vitæ up the Zambesi.

    “The under-mentioned woods from the Seychelles and the
    Mauritius were examined:—

    “1. Tacamaca red; 2. Tacamaca white; 3. Bois de natte; 4.
    Bois de natte; 5. Tacamaca rouge; 6. Tacamaca blanc; 7. Bois
    montagur; 8. Bois danner blanc; 9. Bois blanc; 10. Bois marri
    petite feuille; 11. Bois rouge; 12. Bois de pomme; 13. Bois de
    ronde; 14. Bois d’olive; 15. Faux gayac d’ile de Solomon; 16.
    Tambalicoque; 17. Capuchin; 18. Calofan; 19. Bois puant.

    “The foregoing may be classed as follows, viz.:—

    “1st. All those of small dimensions, that scarcely attain to
    the character of timber-trees, and including the larger woods
    of inferior quality—of these are Nos. 1 to 16 inclusive.

    “2nd. The trees of large growth—these are Nos. 17 to 19
    inclusive.

    “No. 17. Capuchin, a red, hard wood, heavy, and apparently of
    good quality; it is stated to grow to an enormous size at the
    Seychelles, and to be durable. The specimen examined was too
    small to enable me to form a correct opinion of its qualities
    as a ship-building wood.

    “18. Colofan, stated to grow to the height of forty to fifty
    feet before branching, and from two to three feet in diameter,
    at the Seychelles.

    “No. 19, Bois puant, stated to grow to a very large size at
    the Mauritius, and to be durable. The specimens of both 18 and
    19 were very small, and it would be unsafe to give an opinion
    based on this inspection, as to the value of these woods for
    ship-building purposes; it may, however, be mentioned, that
    Mr. M’Leod informed me that nearly all the woods found at the
    Seychelles are used in building such vessels as are required at
    that place.

                                             (Signed) THOS. LASLETT,
                                             “Timber-Inspector.

    “To the Hon. R. DUNDAS, Storekeeper-General of the Navy.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  “15, Whitehall-place, May 3, 1859.

    SIR,—With reference to your letter of the 19th February last,
    politely inquiring what steps should be taken for obtaining
    a supply of the descriptions of woods approved of from the
    Seychelles and the river Zambesi, I have the honour to state
    that the ‘Thomas Blyth,’ a vessel of 500 tons, built at the
    Seychelles in 1837, of timber grown on those islands, is now
    lying in the West India Dock. Her owners, Messrs. Blyth,
    Brothers and Co., Philpot-lane, City, have kindly consented to
    allow her to be submitted to any inspection that you may deem
    necessary for the purpose of satisfying the Lords Commissioners
    of the Admiralty as to the fitness of the timber from the
    Seychelles for ship-building.

    “Hoping to be favoured with a copy of the report of survey on
    the ‘Thomas Blyth,’—I have, &c.

                                                  “J. LYONS M’LEOD.”

    “To the Hon. R. DUNDAS, Storekeeper-General of the Navy.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                   “11th June, 1859.

    “SIR,—Referring to your letter of the 3rd ultimo, I have
    to request, in pursuance of the directions of the Lord
    Commissioners of the Admiralty, that you will be so obliging as
    to state what you would consider the most practicable method
    for obtaining a supply of a few logs of the descriptions of
    woods approved of, from the Seychelles.

    “I have also, in compliance with your request contained in your
    letter above referred to, to transmit on the other side hereof
    a copy of a report, dated the 23rd ultimo, from Mr. Luke, of
    the department of the Surveyor of the Navy, on the ship ‘Thomas
    Blyth.’—I am, Sir, your humble servant,

                                  “R. DUNDAS,
                                  “Storekeeper-General of the Navy.”

    “To J. L. M’LEOD, Esq.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                         “Admiralty, 23rd May, 1859.

    “Having inspected the ship ‘Thomas Blyth,’ lying afloat in the
    West India Docks, I beg to state that the timber and planking
    of which she was built at the Seychelles in 1837 appear to be,
    at the present time, in sound and good condition.

    “This wood is of a chocolate colour, close, hard, and somewhat
    stringy in its texture, and free from shakes.

    “The degree of natural curvature in the growth of the frame
    timbers could not be ascertained, the vessel being ceiled.

    “The scantlings of this vessel are small, the timber squaring
    from nine to twelve inches, and the lengths of her beams and
    shifts of planking about twenty-six feet.

    “Judging from the appearance of this wood, where it could be
    inspected, and its durability, I consider it to be fit for
    ship-building purposes, if it can be procured of sufficiently
    large size for ships of war, of the same quality as the smaller
    timber used in the construction of the vessel above referred to.

    “Two pieces of the wood taken from the inside planking of the
    ‘Thomas Blyth’ are herewith forwarded as samples.

                                                 (Signed) “J. LUKE.”


C.

ON THE POSITION OF OPHIR.


1. _That Ophir was in India._

On behalf of the conjecture that places Ophir in India, the following
arguments are alleged:—

That it is most natural to understand, from the Sacred narrative, that
all the articles enumerated as forming the cargoes of the ships belonging
to Solomon which visited Ophir were procurable in the country where Ophir
was situated; and that all those articles were alone to be found in India.

The Septuagint translators appear to have held this opinion from
rendering ‎‏אוֺפִיר‏‎ (Ophir) Σωφιρ, Σουφιρ, Σωφιρά, which is the
Egyptian name for India.

Josephus also states: “Moreover, the king built many ships in the
Egyptian bay of the Red Sea, in a certain place called Ezion-geber;
it is now called Berenice, and is not far from the city Eloth. This
country belonged formerly to the Jews, and became useful for shipping
from the donations of Hiram, king of Tyre; for he sent a sufficient
number of men thither for pilots, and such as were skilful in navigation,
to whom Solomon gave this command:—That they should go along with his
own stewards to the land that was of old called Ophir, but now the
Chersonesus Aurea, which belongs to India, to fetch gold. And when they
had gathered four hundred talents together they returned to the king
again.”—_Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews_, book viii. c. 6, 4.

And again:—“About the same time there were brought to the king from the
Chersonesus Aurea, a country so called, precious stones and pine-trees,
and these trees he made use of for supporting the temple and the palace,
as also for the materials of musical instruments, the harps and the
psalteries, that the Levites might make use of them in hymns to God. The
wood which was brought to him at this time was larger and finer than
any that had ever been brought before; but let no one imagine these
pine-trees were like those which are now so named,” &c.—(_Ibid_, viii.
c. 7. 1.) The vulgate renders the words “the gold of Ophir” (Job xxviii.
16), by “tinctis Indiæ coloribus.” _See_ Wahner, _De Regione Ophir_;
Tychsen, “De Commerc. Hebr.” in Commentt. Gott. xvi. 164, &c.; Huetti
Commentatio de Navigatione Solomonis; Reland, Dissertt. Miscell., i. 172;
or in Ugolini Thesaurus, vii.; Vitringa, and others.

Professor Heeren, in his excellent work on the Commerce of the
Phœnicians, states that he is of opinion that the fleet of Solomon
did visit India; but, on his own showing, this was unnecessary,
for if the Phœnician colonies trading to India did, at the time of
the Hebro-Phœnician voyage, exist in the Persian Gulf, it would be
unnecessary for Solomon’s fleet to proceed further than to those colonies
in the Persian Gulf to obtain all the produce of India which they were
constantly importing. This opinion, held by Seetzen, has evidently
induced him to place Ophir in the Persian Gulf.

Although the large majority of writers on this subject seek for Ophir
in India, they are by no means united as to the exact locality; some
believing it to be the town of Σομπάρα, at or near Goâ, mentioned by
Ptolemy, Ammianus, and Abulfeda, while the majority place it on the
island of Trophane, generally recognized as that of Ceylon.


2.—_That Ophir was in the Persian Gulf._

Some have sought Ophir in the islands of this Gulf; while others have
proceeded up the Euphrates in search of it. Among the latter may be
mentioned Calmet, in his “Dissertation sur le Pays d’Ophir,” who places
the Ophir of Solomon in Armenia. To carry out this theory, he makes the
fleet of Solomon to pass through the Persian Gulf up the Tigris and
Euphrates, as far as these rivers were navigable, and to where they
receive the produce of Armenian Ophir. It will be subsequently shown
that, by the building of Tadmor in the wilderness, Solomon commanded the
Phœnician trade, by this route, from India to Tyre, and that it would
therefore have been useless for Hiram and Solomon to dispatch a fleet
up the Persian Gulf. The Rev. Charles Foster, B.D., in “The Historical
Geography of Arabia,” London, 1844, places the Ophir of Solomon in the
east of Arabia, recognizing that locality in the town of Ofor, situated
at about 60 or 70 miles from the sea-coast—having a river running a few
miles from that town, and discharging itself into the Persian Gulf. After
arguing the subject very fully, he sums up his opinion as to the above
being the locality in the following words—“From these collective premises
may unpresumptuously be drawn the conclusions—1. That the Ofor of Sale
and d’Anville, a town and district in the mountains of Omân, west of the
coast of Maham, is the Ophir of the Old Testament. 2. That the _littus
Hammœum ubi auri Metalla_, or GOLD COAST, mentioned by Pliny, was the
true term of the famous voyage in the reign of Solomon, from Ezion-geber,
or Akaba, at the head of the Gulf of Elah. 3. And, lastly, that this
Ophir or Ofor, the country of the Kottabani of Ptolemy, one of the many
tribes known generally in Arabia by the denomination of Beni Kahtan or
Kahtanys, was the primitive and proper seat of the family of Ophir, the
son of Joktan, which, like so many other districts denominated from the
brethren of this patriarch, still preserves, at the present day, the
name and memory of their fathers.” The Rev. Mr. Foster adds in a note,
“The name of this Joktanite patriarch, and of the famous gold country of
Arabia, which, in the time of Ptolemy and Pliny, bore, and which still
retains, his name, is a curious specimen of the flexibility of proper
names in the Arabic, and its kindred dialects. For _Ophor_ can be traced
through, at least, eight varieties of form—thus, in the prophecies of
Jeremiah and Daniel (Jer. x. 9, Dan. x. 5), it is written _Uphaz_; in the
Song of Solomon (v. 11) [?] _Paz_, (LXX. vers.) _Kephaz_; in Chronicles
(2 Chron. iii. 6) _Paravim_; by Eupolemus, _Orphe_; by Ptolemy,
_Appa_; by Niebuhr, _Efi_; and by Sale d’Anville, and all subsequent
authorities, _Ofor_. M. Niebuhr notices variations nearly as numerous in
the pronunciation of the word _Simoom_.” “Vent empoisonné, qu’on nomme
Sâm, Smum, Samiel, ou Samêle, suivant les différens prononciations des
Arabes.”—_Descript. de l’Arabie_, tome iii. p. 7; _Historical Geography
of Arabia_, vol. i. p. 171. To the opinion expressed by the Rev. Mr.
Foster the objection already made to that of Calmet equally applies,
viz., that Hiram and Solomon already commanded all the trade of the
Persian Gulf which reached Tyre and Jerusalem by way of Tadmor.


3.—_That Ophir was situated in South Arabia._

M. Niebuhr may be quoted as the great authority for Ophir being situated
in South Arabia, although he failed in pointing out its exact position,
as may be learned from the following:—“Je n’ai point trouvé de nom
ressemblant à celui d’Ophir; mais je ne doute pas que si quelq’un
avoit occasion de parcourir le pays depuis Aden jusqu’à Dafar, comme
je l’ai parcouru de l’Mâm, il ne la trouve quelque part. Ophir étoit
vraisemblablement le principal port du royaume des Sabéens, et il étoit
san doute situé entre Aden et Dafar, peut-être même étoit-ce le port que
les Grecs appellent Cana.”—_Niebuhr_, tome iii. p. 253.


4. _That Ophir was situated at Sofala._

Two thousand years before the Christian era, we learn that Semiramis,
the great Queen of Assyria, not contented with the extensive dominions
left to her by her husband, Ninus, enlarged them by the conquest of a
great part of Ethiopia. (_Rollin_, book iii. chap. i. sec. 5. See also
_Memoirs of the Academy of Belles Lettres_, vol. iii. p. 343, _et seq._
for two learned dissertations upon the Assyrian Empire, and particularly
on the reign and actions of Semiramis.)

Sesostris, one of the most powerful kings of Egypt, ascended the throne
on the death of his father, B.C. 1491. He formed no less a project than
the conquest of the known world. He began his expedition by the conquest
of Ethiopia, and obliged the nations of that country to furnish him,
annually, with a certain quantity of ebony, ivory, and gold. Having
fitted out a fleet of four hundred sail, he advanced to the Red Sea,
and made himself master of the isles and coasts of that sea, proceeding
afterwards to India. In the countries which he conquered, he left
pillars on which the following inscription was engraved:—“Sesostris,
king of kings, and lord of lords, subdued this country by the power of
his arms.” His empire extended from the Ganges to the Danube. Diodorus
Siculus tells us that he cut canals from Memphis to the Red Sea, opening
Egypt to the commerce of Libya, Ethiopia, and Arabia. (_Herod._ l. ii.
chap. 102, 110. _Diod._ l. 1, sec. 48, 54.)

In the sublime poem of Job—now generally attributed to Moses, and
supposed to have been written previous to the Egyptian Exodus, during
some part of Moses’ residence with his hospitable father-in-law, Jethro,
in that district of Idumæa which was named Midian—about 1520 B.C.—mention
is made of the gold of Ophir, Job xxviii. v. 16, showing that the gold of
Ophir was at the date of this poem known to the Arabs of Idumæa, where
the poem was written. In Genesis and Exodus frequent mention is made
of myrrh, cinnamon, cassia, and aloes, articles which were imported by
the Arabs of the south of Arabia from India and Africa, but which were
believed by the Hebrews to be the produce of Arabia.

David, in Psalm xlv. v. 8, 9, mentions myrrh, aloes, cassia, ivory
palaces, and the gold of Ophir.

The Queen of Sheba, in Luke xi. v. 31, is called the “Queen of the
South,” that is to say, of the country the most remote known to the
Hebrews; see 1 Kings x. 1 and 2, Chron. ix. 1. In vol. ii., p. 233,
I have shown how Arabia was situated for commerce, and, bearing its
position in mind, it may now be proper to refer to the account of
this expedition of Solomon. “And King Solomon made a navy of ships in
Ezion-geber, which is Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land
of Edom. And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, ship-men, that had
knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon. And they came to
Ophir; and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and
brought it to King Solomon.... And when the Queen of Sheba heard of the
fame of Solomon, concerning the name of the Lord, she came to Jerusalem
with a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much
gold and precious stones. And when she was come to Solomon, she communed
with him of all that was in her heart: and Solomon told her all her
questions; there was not any thing hid from the king which he told her
not. And when the Queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, and the
house that he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of
his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and
his cup-bearers, and his ascent by which he went up into the house of
the Lord, there was no more spirit in her. And she said to the king, It
was a true report that I heard in mine own land, of thy acts, and of thy
wisdom. Howbeit, I believed not the words until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it. And behold, the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity
exceedeth thy fame which I heard. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy
servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighteth in thee, to set thee on
the throne of Israel, because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore
made he thee king, to do judgment and justice. And she gave the king one
hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and
precious stones; there came no more such abundance of spices as these
which the Queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.... And the navy, also, of
Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty
of almug trees, and precious stones. And the king made, of the almug
trees, pillars for the house of the Lord, and for the king’s house; harps
also, and psalteries for singers; there came no such almug trees, nor
were seen unto this day. And King Solomon gave unto the Queen of Sheba
all her desire, whatsoever she asked; besides that which Solomon gave of
his royal bounty. So she turned and went to her own country, she and her
servants.”

Some have looked upon the Queen of Sheba as the Queen of Sabia, situated
in the kingdom of Sofala, on the east coast of Africa; but for our
present purpose it will only be necessary to recognize in her the head of
that portion of the Arabs commanding the south of Arabia, and the Emporia
_there located_, and also on the opposite adjoining north-east coast of
Africa—although she may have been Queen of the Arabian kingdom of Sheba,
and also the African-Arabic kingdom of Sabia.

The account given of the visit of the Queen of Sheba, both in the 1st
book of Kings and also in 2nd book of the Chronicles, is preceded by the
statement of the friendly terms on which Solomon was with Hiram, king
of Tyre, who, by way of the Gulf of Persia and the Phœnician colonies
established there, commanded the commerce of India, which reached Tyre by
way of the Persian Gulf, and the Wilderness or the Desert. We are also
told, previously to the account of the visit of Solomon’s ships to Ophir,
that he built Baalath and Tadmor in the Wilderness (1 Kings ix., 18,
and 2 Chron. viii., 4-6), doubtless to secure the caravans of his ally,
Hiram, from the depredations of the Bedouin Arabs, while crossing the
desert on their way with the merchandize of India, which arrived by the
Persian Gulf to Tyre.

This Tadmor or Palmyra was, we know, a fenced city, built in a desert,
solely for the protection of commerce, and was lost to the Hebrews on
the division of the kingdom after the death of Solomon; it is doubtless
the Palmyra so celebrated for its destruction by the Romans, when its
Queen, Zenobia, endeavoured to throw off the Roman yoke. It commanded
the commerce of India by way of the Gulf of Persia; and therefore we may
fairly suppose that the fleets of Solomon and Hiram, which proceeded down
the Red Sea, were bent upon opening a new mart of commerce, doubtless
that commanded by the Queen of Sheba, who is mixed up with this account,
and who, from history, we learn, bore a son to Solomon during her stay in
Jerusalem, with whom she returned to her own country.

This was a trade which the Phœnicians had not possession of, and Hiram
naturally enlisted the co-operation of his great ally, Solomon, for the
purpose of obtaining the productions of Ophir direct, instead of through
the Arabs of Southern Arabia. The time chosen was most propitious; it
was after the building of Tadmor in the Wilderness, when the affairs of
Hiram and Solomon had become united by commerce; and at the period when
Solomon had obtained possession of Idumæa or Edom, and his great renown
had attracted to his court the Queen of Sheba, who had brought with her
those imports into Arabia most valued by her own subjects, as being those
sought after by the nations of the west, which gave so great an impulse
to the maritime enterprise of the Arabs.

Some difficulty appears to arise from the different reading of the
account of the Hebrew-Phœnician ships going to Ophir, as given in 1 Kings
and 2 Chronicles. Let us compare them thus:—

    1 KINGS, x. 22.                     2 CHRON. ix. 21.

    “For the king had at sea            “For the king’s ships
    a navy of Tharshish with the        went to Tarshish with the
    navy of Hiram. Once in              servants of Hiram: every
    every three years came the          three years once came the
    navy of Tharshish, bringing         ships of Tarshish, bringing
    gold and silver, ivory, and         gold and silver, ivory, and
    apes, and peacocks.”                apes and peacocks.”

    1 KINGS, xxii. 48.                 2 CHRON. xx. 36-37.

    “Jehoshaphat made ships             “He (Jehoshaphat) joined
    of Tarshish to go to Ophir          himself with him (the King
    for gold, but they went not;        of Israel) to make ships to go
    for the ships were broken at        to Tarshish; and they made
    Ezion-geber.”                       the ships in Ezion-gaber....
                                        And the ships were broken,
                                        that they were not able to go
                                        to Tarshish.”

The passages of Scripture in which “Ophir” and “Tharshish” are named,
bring before us the only maritime commerce which the Hebrews appear to
have been engaged in, and which arose from Solomon’s alliance with
Hiram, king of Tyre.

Tarshish, or Tharshish, is, on very good grounds, considered to be
Tartessus, a very important commercial settlement of the Phœnicians, on
the Atlantic coast of Spain, at the mouth of the Bœtis, or Guadalquiver,
and not far from the ancient Gades, now Cadiz: in Gen. x. 4; Ps. lxxii.
10; Ezek. xxxiii. 13; Jer. x. 9; Ezek. xxvii. 9; Isa. xxiii. 1, 6, 10;
Isa. lxvi. 19, mention is made of this Phœnician trade.

I imagine that the Phœnicians, who doubtless built the ships for this
new trade to Ophir, took for their models those vessels which were
engaged in their most distant voyages, viz., in the trade to Tartessus,
and the isles of the west (Britain); or that they took some of these
vessels to pieces, carried them across the Isthmus of Suez (as has been
done subsequently by the Sultan of Cairo and others), and put them
together in the Red Sea. In either case the name “ships of Tharshish”
would be applied to them in the same sense as we should make use of the
terms “Indiamen,” or “Australian clippers.” That is to say, first-class
merchant vessels. Some have supposed that two fleets were used for this
voyage, one in the Mediterranean, and the other in the Red Sea; but it
is by no means likely that the Phœnicians, who were not “Free-traders,”
would allow Solomon to participate in the Tartessus or Mediterranean
trade, although they were perfectly willing to obtain his co-operation
and powerful assistance where they required it, by way of Tadmor and in
the Red Sea, by both of which routes they had to contend with the Arabs.
If the Tarshish in these passages be the Tartessus in the Mediterranean,
then we have a certain proof that the ships of Solomon circumnavigated
Africa, and that Ophir must have been situated on the east or west coast
of Africa in the voyage from Ezion-geber to Tartessus or Tharshish.

The earliest account which we have of Africa having been circumnavigated
is certainly by the Phœnicians, under the orders of Necho (Pharo-Necho),
king of Egypt, who sent ships on a voyage of discovery down the Red Sea,
to proceed along the coast of Africa, and endeavour to return by the
Pillars of Hercules.

Herodotus narrates, in a few words, the results of this enterprize,
which was undertaken about 604 years before the Christian era. He says,
“The Phœnicians, setting sail from the Red Sea, made their way into
the Southern Sea; and when autumn approached they drew their vessels
to land, sowed a crop, and waited till it was grown, when they reaped
it, and again put to sea. Having spent two years in this manner, in
the third year they reached the Pillars of Hercules, and returned to
Egypt, reporting what does not find belief with me, but may perhaps
with some other person; for they said that in passing Africa they had
the sun on their right hand. In this manner Libya was first known.”
Now, it so happens that the very fact which caused Herodotus to doubt
the authenticity of the account of this voyage is to us one of the
most convincing proofs of the truth of the narrative, viz., “that in
passing Africa (after rounding the Cape of Good Hope) they had the sun
on their right hand.” While I am disposed to contend that Africa was
circumnavigated from the Red Sea in the reign of Pharo-Necho, I cannot
bring myself to believe (without more convincing proof than simply the
statement that from Ezion-geber “the king’s ships went to Tharshish”)
that the Hebrew-Phœnician fleet circumnavigated Africa 400 years previous
to the Egypto-Phœnician fleet of Pharo-Necho; for, if such was the case,
the Phœnicians would have been aware of the previous circumnavigation of
Libya, and both events would have been handed down by the Phœnicians—for
we learn from Josephus that they were in the habit of preserving in
their records events of much less importance to them, as a commercial
nation, than the circumnavigation of a large continent, rich in the most
coveted commodities of the eastern world. I am therefore inclined to
think that the Tharshish of Chronicles cannot be the Tartessus of Spain;
and will, in the following inquiry, seek only to establish the position
of Ophir, as the products of that place were the objects sought by the
Hebrew-Phœnician fleet.

Various points on the eastern coast of Africa have been fixed upon, but
generally the conclusion is in favour of Sofala, which I am inclined to
think is the correct position. João dos Sanctos tells us, as we find it
in Purchas:—

“Near to Massapa is a great hill called Fura, whence may be discerned a
great part of the kingdom of Monomotapa, for which cause he (the king)
will not suffer the Portuguese to go thither, that they should not covet
his great country and hidden mines. On the top of that hill are yet
standing pieces of old walls and ancient ruins of lime and stone, which
testify that there have been strong buildings—a thing not seen in all
Caffraria, for even the king’s houses are of wood, daubed with clay,
and covered with straw. The natives, and especially the Moors, have a
tradition from their ancestors, that those houses belonged to the Queen
of Saba, who carried much gold thence down to the Cuama (Zambesi) to
the sea, and so along the coast of Ethiopia to the Red Sea. Others say
that these ruins were Solomon’s factory, and that this Fura or Afura is
no other than Ophir, the name being not much altered in so long a time.
This is certain, that round about that hill there is much and find gold.
The navigation might, in these times, be longer, for want of so good
ships or pilots as are now to be had, and by reason of much time spent
in trucking with the Caffres, as even in this time the merchants often
spend a year or more in that business, although the Caffres be grown
more covetous of our wares, and the mines better known. They are so
lazy to gather gold that they will not do it till necessity constrain
them. Much time is also spent in the voyage by the rivers, and by
that sea which hath differing monsoons, and can be sailed but by two
winds, which blow six months from the east, and as many from the west.
Solomon’s fleet had, besides those mentioned, this let, that the Red Sea
is not safely navigable but by day, by reason of many isles and shoals;
likewise it was necessary to put into harbours for fresh water and other
provisions”—[“This,” Purchas remarks, “was by reason their ships were
small, as that infancy of navigation required”]—“and to take in new
pilots and mariners, and to make reparations, which considered”—[adds
Purchas, “with their creeping by the shore for want of compass and
experience in those seas, and their Sabbath rests, and their truck with
the Caffres”]—“might extend the whole voyage, in going, staying, and
returning, to three years. Further, the ivory, apes, gems, and precious
woods (which grow in the wild places of Tebe within Sofala) whence they
make almaidas, or canoes, twenty yards long, of one timber; and much fine
black wood (ebony) grows on that coast, and is thence carried to India
and Portugal. All these may make the matter probable. As for peacocks, I
saw none there, but there must needs be some within land; for I have seen
some Caffres wear their plumes on their heads. As there is store of fine
gold, so also is there fine silver in Chicona, which are rich mines.”

In addition to the statement of João dos Sanctos, who was a resident at
Sofala, it may be asserted that all the circumstances which are against
the theories which place Ophir in Arabia, the Persian Gulf, or even India
and Ceylon, are in favour of its being fixed on the African coast.

It appears that “every three years” may, with equal or greater propriety,
be rendered “every third year,” which may mean any time more than two
years, and less than three; and, further, that as the Hebrews counted
broken years and days for whole ones, it might not be even two years.
Thus, if they left in the year 1, continued away all the year 2, and
returned in the spring of the year 3, they would be said to return in
the third year, though they had only been absent eighteen months. Thus
our Saviour rose “on the third day,” though he had only been one day and
two nights in the tomb.—See notes on 2 Chronicles, chap. xx., in the
“Pictorial Bible.”

In order to throw a little more light on this subject, let us consider
the winds in the Red Sea, which, in connection with the monsoons on the
east coast of Africa, would be the most favourable for the navigation
of a large fleet, in the infancy of maritime enterprise, prosecuting a
voyage from the Gulf of Akaba to Sofala and back.

South winds predominate for two-thirds of the year in the south part of
the Red Sea, viz., from October to June, and from about the middle of the
month of June to the middle of October north winds prevail throughout
the Red Sea.

I will, therefore, suppose that the Hebrew-Phœnician fleet was prepared
to start from Ezion-geber with a fair wind on the 1st of July of the year
1 of this memorable voyage, and that all the vessels composing the fleet
succeeded in rendezvousing at the great Arab emporium of Aden in Arabia,
or at Berbera, Zeyla (or any of those outlets which we know the Arabs
possessed for the commerce of north-eastern Africa), on the opposite
coast of Africa. Here the fleet would be detained some time while
refitting, provisioning, watering, repairing the damages of those vessels
which had suffered in the dangerous navigation of the Red Sea; and
obtaining pilots from the Arabs, who were acquainted with the harbours
and rivers on the east coast of Africa.

The north-east monsoon blows in the Mozambique Channel, through which the
fleet would have to pass on the voyage to Sofala, from November to April.
This monsoon reaches Makallah about the 5th of November, and until about
the 3rd of January the weather is unsettled in the Gulf of Aden—that is
to say, between the meridians of Cape Guardafui and that of Bab-el-Mandeb.

It may fairly be supposed that the Hebrew-Phœnician fleet would not put
to sea from the Arab emporium, where it was refitting, until the end
of January of the year 2; for in the months of January, February, and
March, fine clear weather prevails in the Gulf of Aden, and it is at
this season that the Arabs carry on trade in the Gulf of Aden in their
dhows, measuring from 50 to 300 tons burthen. By starting at this season
the fleet would enter the north-east monsoon with fine clear weather,
and reach Sofala in March or April, with the cessation of the north-east
monsoon.

As the Phœnicians were accustomed to carry on their trade themselves,
and had no factors or agents established, at least in the infancy of the
trade, at Sofala, we may assume that they spent the whole of the six
months from April to November of year 2, when the south-west or fair
monsoon for the return voyage was blowing, in trading with the natives or
residents at this African-Arabic settlement of Sabia; and also that they
were only prepared to return when the next fair monsoon (S.W.) set in at
Sofala, viz., in April of year 3. That is to say, they were detained by
trading and a contrary monsoon for one year at Sofala.

In the month of April or May of year 3, we will suppose the fleet
to leave Sofala with the south-west monsoon, and reach Aden, or any
neighbouring Arab emporium, before the unsettled weather which is to be
found in the Gulf of Aden in the month of August. The fleet would be able
to refit there so as to take advantage of the south wind commencing to
blow in the month of October, and would reach Ezion-geber before the end
of December of the year 3.

I have thus endeavoured to show that the time for prosecuting a
successful trading voyage from Ezion-geber to Ophir or Sofala and back,
would be nearly three years.

All the articles enumerated in Scripture are to be found at Sofala,
with, perhaps, the exception of the peacock (see vol. i., p. 208); I am
not aware that this bird is to be found in Africa—it has hitherto been
looked upon as an Indian bird; and, in consequence, I suppose, some have
compared ‎‏תוכיים‏‎, _tukejem_, with the word ‎‏תכה‏‎, _takah_, to cling;
in Deuteronomy xxxiii., v. 3, and translated it parrots.[11] But the east
coast of Africa has no parrots—only paroquets—while they are to be found
in great numbers at the mouth of nearly all the rivers on the west coast
of Africa. The nearest place to Sofala where parrots can be obtained is
on the island of Madagascar, where a very handsome jet-black parrot may
be procured.

The meaning of the Hebrew word translated peacocks is a disputed point,
and some have held that it means the bird called guinea-fowl, which is
found in great numbers on the east coast of Africa.

The inscriptions on the ruins at Zimboë might throw a new light on
the position of Ophir, and perhaps entirely clear up one of the most
interesting questions of Sacred history.

THE END.

                                 LONDON:
                  PRINTED BY R. BORN, GLOUCESTER STREET,
                              REGENT’S PARK.




FOOTNOTES


[1] See vol. i., p. 333.

[2] See vol. i. p. 120.

[3] See vol. i., chap. viii. on Delagoa Bay: its History and Resources.

[4] To his widow and five orphans he has left the heritage of a good
name: while it is hoped that the reader will assist the author to respond
to an earnest appeal which has just reached him, from Natal, on their
behalf.

[5] 1 Kings, chapter x., v. 10.

[6] See Appendix C.

[7] See Captain R. L. Playfair’s _History of Arabia Felix, or Yemen_,
1859.

[8] See the accompanying chart of Eastern Africa, and the author’s
letters on this route in “_The Times_” of September 14, 1859, _et seq._

[9] The author has to acknowledge the kind assistance of his friend Mr.
Consul Brand in translating the above from a Portuguese account.

[10] NOTE BY SIR J. W. HOOKER:—“This is doubtless the common hemp
(_Cannabis sativa_), which is grown and used in various parts of tropical
Africa and all over India (where it is also called ‘Bang’) for smoking,
&c. In Europe, and as far north as Archangel, it is only used for its
fibre in making cloth, cordage, &c.”

[11] For this information I am greatly indebted to the Rev. Dr. M.
Heidenheim.




NEW AND INTERESTING WORKS PUBLISHED BY MESSRS. HURST AND BLACKETT,
SUCCESSORS TO MR. COLBURN.

                                          13. GREAT MARLBOROUGH ST. LONDON


=MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF GEORGE IV.= FROM ORIGINAL FAMILY DOCUMENTS. By
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS, K.G. 2 vols. 8vo. with Portraits.
30s. bound.

Among the many interesting subjects elucidated in this work will be
found: The Trial of Queen Caroline—The King’s Visits to Ireland,
Scotland, and Hanover—Female Influence at Court—The Death of Lord
Castlereagh—Junction of the Grenville Party with the Government—The
Political and Literary Career of George Canning—O’Connell and the
Catholic Claims—The Marquess Wellesley in Ireland—The Duke of
Wellington’s Administration—George the Fourth as a Patron of Art and
Literature, &c.

    “The country is very much indebted to the Duke of Buckingham
    for the publication of these volumes—to our thinking the most
    valuable of the contributions to recent history which he has
    yet compiled from his family papers. Besides the King, the
    Duke of Buckingham’s canvass is full of the leading men of
    the day—Castlereagh, Liverpool, Canning, Wellington, Peel,
    and their compeers. We are sure that no reader, whether he
    seeks for gossip, or for more sterling information, will be
    disappointed by the book. There are several most characteristic
    letters of the Duke of Wellington.”—_John Bull._

    “These volumes are the most popular of the series of Buckingham
    papers, not only from the nature of the matter, but from the
    closeness of the period to our own times.”—_Spectator._

    “There is much in these volumes which deserves the perusal of
    all who desire an Intimate acquaintance with the history of the
    period. The comments of well-informed men, like Lord Grenville
    and Mr. T. Grenville, disclosing as they do the motives of
    individuals, the secret movements of parties, and the causes
    of public events, are of high value to the student, and
    exceedingly interesting to the general reader.”—_Daily News._

    “These volumes are of great Intrinsic and historical value.
    They give us a definite acquaintance with the actions, a
    valuable insight into the characters, of a succession of
    illustrious statesmen.”—_Critic._

    “The original documents published In these volumes—penned by
    public men, who were themselves active participators In the
    events and scenes described—throw a great deal of very curious
    and very valuable light upon this period of our history.
    The private letters of such men as Lord Grenville, Mr. T.
    Grenville, Mr. Charles Wynn, Mr. Freemantle, Dr. Phillimore,
    and Mr. Plumer Ward, written in the absence of all restraint,
    necessarily possess a high interest even for the lightest and
    most careless reader; whilst, in an historical sense, as an
    authentic source from which future historians will be enabled
    to form their estimate of the characters of the leading men
    who nourished in the reign of the last George, they must be
    regarded as possessing an almost inestimable value. The more
    reserved communications, too, of such men as Lord Liverpool,
    the Duke of Wellington, the Marquis of Wellesley, Sir Henry
    Parnell, &c., will be received with great interest and
    thankfulness by every historiographer, whilst the lighter
    _billets_ of Sir Walter Scott and Mr. Henry Wynn will be
    welcome to every body. Taking this publication altogether, we
    must give the Duke of Buckingham great credit for the manner
    in which he has prepared and executed it, and at the same time
    return him our hearty thanks for the interesting and valuable
    information which he has unfolded to us from his family
    archives.”—_Observer._

=MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF THE REGENCY.= FROM ORIGINAL FAMILY DOCUMENTS. By
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS, K.G. 2 vols. 8vo., with Portraits,
30s. bound.

    “Here are two more goodly volumes on the English Court; volumes
    full of new sayings, pictures, anecdotes, and scenes. The Duke
    of Buckingham travels over nine years of English history. But
    what years those were, from 1811 to 1820! What events at home
    and abroad they bore to the great bourne!—from the accession of
    the Regent to power to the death of George III.—including the
    fall of Perceval; the invasion of Russia, and the war in Spain;
    the battles of Salumanca and Horodino; the fire of Moscow;
    the retreat of Napoleon; the conquest of Spain; the surrender
    of Napoleon; the return from Elba; the Congress of Vienna;
    the Hundred Days; the crowning carnage of Waterloo; the exile
    to St. Helena; the return of the Bourbons; the settlement of
    Europe; the public scandals at the English Court; the popular
    discontent, and the massacre of Peterloo! On many parts of
    this story the documents published by the Duke of Buckingham
    cast new jets of light, clearing up much secret history. Old
    stories are confirmed—new traits of character are brought out.
    In short, many new and pleasant additions are made to our
    knowledge of those times.”—_Athenæum._

    “Invaluable, as showing the true light in which many of the
    stirring events of the Regency are to be viewed. The lovers of
    Court gossip will also find not a little for their edification
    and amusement.”—_Literary Gazette._

    “These volumes cover a complete epoch, the period of the
    Regency—a period of large and stirring English history.
    To the Duke of Buckingham, who thus, out of his family
    archives, places within our reach authentic and exceedingly
    minute pictures of the governors of England, we owe grateful
    acknowledgements. His papers abound in fresh lights on old
    topics, and in new illustrations and anecdotes. The intrinsic
    value of the letters is enhanced by the judicious setting of
    the explanatory comment that accompanies them, which is put
    together with much care and honesty.”—_Examiner._

=MEMOIRS OF THE COURT AND CABINETS OF GEORGE THE THIRD.= FROM ORIGINAL
FAMILY DOCUMENTS. By the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM AND CHANDOS, K.G., &c. THE
THIRD AND FOURTH VOLUMES, comprising the period from 1800 to 1810 and
completing this important work. 8vo., with Portraits. 30s. bound.

    “The present volumes exhibit the same features as the former
    portion of the series. The general reader is entertained, and
    the reader for historical purposes is enlightened. Of their
    value and importance, there cannot be two opinions.”—_Athenæum._

    “These volumes comprehend a period the most important in
    the events relating to our domestic affairs and foreign
    relations to be found in the British annuls; told, not only by
    eye-witnesses, but by the very men who put them in motion. The
    volumes now published immeasurably exceed their predecessors in
    interest and importance. They must find a place in the library
    of every English gentleman.”—_Standard._

=HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF HENRY IV., KING OF FRANCE AND NAVARRE.= From
numerous Original Sources. By MISS FREER. Author of “The Lives of
Marguerite d’Angoulême, Elizabeth de Valois, Henry III,” &c. 2 vols. with
Portraits, 21s.

=LECTURES ON ART, LITERATURE, AND SOCIAL SCIENCE.= By HIS EMINENCE
CARDINAL WISEMAN. 1 vol. with Portrait. (_In Preparation._)

=HENRY III. KING OF FRANCE AND POLAND; HIS COURT AND TIMES.= From
numerous unpublished sources, including MS. Documents in the Bibliothèque
Impériale, and the Archives of France and Italy. By MISS FREER. Author of
“Marguerite d’Angoulême,” “Elizabeth de Valois, and the Court of Philip
II,” &c. 3 vols. post 8vo. with fine portraits, 31s. 6d. bound.

    “Miss Freer having won for herself the reputation of a most
    painstaking and trustworthy historian not less than an
    accomplished writer, by her previous memoirs of sovereigns of
    the houses of Valois and Navarre, will not fail to meet with
    a most cordial and hearty welcome for her present admirable
    history of Henry III., the last of the French kings of the
    house of Valois. We refer our readers to the volumes themselves
    for the interesting details of the life and reign of Henry
    III., his residence in Poland, his marriage with Louise de
    Lorraine, his cruelties, his hypocrisies, his penances, his
    assassination by the hands of the monk Jaques Clément, &c.
    Upon these points, as well as with reference to other persons
    who occupied a prominent position during this period, abundant
    information is afforded by Miss Freer; and the public will feel
    with us that a deep debt of gratitude is due to that lady for
    the faithful and admirable manner in which she has pourtrayed
    the Court and Times of Henry the Third.”—_Chronicle._

    “The previous historical labours of Miss Freer were so
    successful as to afford a rich promise in the present
    undertaking, the performance of which, it is not too much to
    say, exceeds expectation, and testifies to her being not only
    the most accomplished, but the most accurate of modern female
    historians. The Life of Henry III. of France is a contribution
    to literature which will have a reputation as imperishable as
    its present fame must be large and increasing. Indeed, the book
    is of such a truly fascinating character, that once begun it is
    impossible to leave it.”—_Messenger._

    “Among the class of chronicle histories, Miss Freer’s Henry the
    Third of France is entitled to a high rank. As regards style
    and treatment Miss Freer has made a great advance upon her
    ‘Elizabeth de Valois,’ as that book was an advance upon her
    ‘Marguerite D’Angoulême.’”—_Spectator._

    “We heartily recommend this work to the reading public. Miss
    Freer has much, perhaps all, of the quick perception and
    picturesque style by which Miss Strickland has earned her
    well-deserved popularity.”—_Critic._

=ELIZABETH DE VALOIS, QUEEN OF SPAIN, AND THE COURT OF PHILIP II.= From
numerous unpublished sources in the Archives of France, Italy, and Spain.
By MISS FREER. 2 vols. post 8vo. with fine Portraits by HEATH. 21s.

    “It is not attributing too much to Miss Freer to say that
    herself and Mr. Prescott are probably the best samples of
    our modern biographers. The present volumes will be a boon
    to posterity for which it will be grateful. Equally suitable
    for instruction and amusement, they portray one of the most
    interesting characters and periods of history.”—_John Bull._

    “Such a book as the memoir of Elizabeth de Valois is a
    literary treasure which will be the more appreciated as its
    merits obtain that reputation to which they most justly are
    entitled. Miss Freer has done her utmost to make the facts of
    Elizabeth’s, Don Carlos’, and Philip II.’s careers fully known,
    as they actually transpired.”—_Bell’s Messenger._

=THE LIFE OF MARGUERITE D’ANGOULEME, QUEEN of NAVARRE, SISTER of FRANCIS
I.= By MISS FREER. Second Edition, 2 vols. with fine Portraits, 21s.

    “This is a very useful and amusing book. It is a good work,
    very well done. The authoress is quite equal in power and grace
    to Miss Strickland. She must have spent great time and labour
    in collecting the information, which she imparts in an easy and
    agreeable manner. It is difficult to lay down her book after
    having once begun it. This is owing partly to the interesting
    nature of the subject, partly to the skilful manner in which
    it has been treated. No other life of Marguerite has yet been
    published, even in France. Indeed, till Louis Philippe ordered
    the collection and publication of manuscripts relating to the
    history of France, no such work could be published. It is
    difficult to conceive how, under any circumstances, it could
    have been better done.”—_Standard._

=LODGE’S PEERAGE AND BARONETAGE FOR 1860.= UNDER THE ESPECIAL PATRONAGE
OF HER MAJESTY AND H.R.H. THE PRINCE CONSORT. Corrected throughout by
the Nobility. Twenty-Ninth Edition, in 1 vol. royal 8vo., with the Arms
beautifully engraved, handsomely bound, with gilt edges, price 31s. 6d.

LODGE’S PEERAGE AND BARONETAGE is acknowledged to be the most complete,
as well as the most elegant, work of the kind. As an established and
authentic authority on all questions respecting the family histories,
honours, and connections of the titled aristocracy, no work has ever
stood so high. It is published under the especial patronage of Her
Majesty, and His Royal Highness the Prince Consort, and is annually
corrected throughout, from the personal communications of the Nobility.
It is the only work of its class, in which, _the type being kept
constantly standing_, every correction is made in its proper place to
the date of publication, an advantage which gives it supremacy over all
its competitors. Independently of its full and authentic information
respecting the existing Peers and Baronets of the realm, the most
sedulous attention is given in its pages to the collateral branches of
the various noble families, and the names of many thousand individuals
are introduced, which do not appear in other records of the titled
classes. For its authority, correctness, and facility of arrangement, and
the beauty of its typography and binding, the work is justly entitled to
the high place it occupies on the tables of Her Majesty and the Nobility.

    “Lodge’s Peerage must supersede all other works of the kind,
    for two reasons: first, it is on a better plan; and, secondly,
    it is better executed. We can safely pronounce it to be the
    readiest, the most useful, and exactest of modern works on the
    subject.”—_Spectator._

    “A work which corrects all errors of former works. It is the
    production of a herald, we had almost said, by birth, but
    certainly by profession and studies, Mr. Lodge, the Norroy King
    of Arms. It is a most useful publication.”—_Times._

    “As perfect a Peerage of the British Empire as we are ever
    likely to see published. Great pains have been taken to make it
    as complete and accurate as possible. The work is patronised
    by Her Majesty and the Prince Consort; and it is worthy of a
    place in every gentleman’s library, as well as in every public
    institution.”—_Herald._

    “As a work of contemporaneous history, this volume is of great
    value—the materials having been derived from the most authentic
    sources and in the majority of cases emanating from the noble
    families themselves. It contains all the needful information
    respecting the nobility of the Empire.”—_Post._

    “This work should form a portion of every gentleman’s library.
    At all times, the information which it contains, derived from
    official sources exclusively at the command of the author,
    is of importance to most classes of the community; to the
    antiquary it must be invaluable, for implicit reliance may be
    placed on its contents.”—_Globe._

    “This work derives great value from the high authority of Mr.
    Lodge. The plan is excellent.”—_Literary Gazette._

    “When any book has run through so many editions, its reputation
    is so indelibly stamped, that it requires neither criticism nor
    praise. It is but just, however, to say, that ‘Lodge’s Peerage
    and Baronetage’ is the most elegant and accurate, and the
    best of its class. The chief point of excellence attaching to
    this Peerage consists neither in its elegance of type nor its
    completeness of illustration, but in its authenticity, which
    is insured by the letter-press being always kept standing, and
    by immediate alteration being made whenever any change takes
    place, either by death or otherwise, amongst the nobility of
    the United Kingdom. The work has obtained the special patronage
    of Her Most Gracious Majesty, and of His Royal Highness the
    Prince Consort, which patronage has never been better or more
    worthily bestowed.”—_Messenger._

    “‘Lodge’s Peerage and Baronetage’ has become, as it were,
    an ‘Institution’ of this country; in other words, it is
    indispensable, and cannot be done without, by any person having
    business in the great world. The authenticity of this valuable
    work, as regards the several topics to which it refers, has
    never been exceeded, and, consequently, it must be received
    as one of the most important contributions to social and
    domestic history extant. A book of reference—indispensable
    in most cases, useful in all—it should be in the hands of
    every one having connections in, or transactions with, the
    aristocracy.”—_Observer._

=LODGE’S GENEALOGY OF THE PEERAGE AND BARONETAGE OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE.=
A NEW AND REVISED EDITION. Uniform with “THE PEERAGE” Volume, with the
arms beautifully engraved, handsomely bound with gilt edges, price 31s.
6d.

The desire very generally manifested for a republication of this volume
has dictated the present entire revision of its contents. The Armorial
Bearings prefixed to the History of each Noble Family, render the work
complete in itself and uniform with the Volume of THE PEERAGE, which it
is intended to accompany and illustrate. The object of the whole Work,
in its two distinct yet combined characters, has been useful and correct
information; and the careful attention devoted to this object throughout
will, it is hoped, render the Work worthy of the August Patronage with
which it is honoured and of the liberal assistance accorded by its Noble
Correspondents, and will secure from them and from the Public, the same
cordial reception it has hitherto experienced. The great advantage of
“The Genealogy” being thus given in a separate volume, Mr. Lodge has
himself explained in the Preface to “The Peerage.”

=EPISODES OF FRENCH HISTORY DURING THE CONSULATE AND FIRST EMPIRE.= By
MISS PARDOE, author of “The Life of Marie de Medicis,” &c. 2 vols. 21s.

    “We recommend Miss Pardoe’s ‘Episodes’ as very pleasant
    reading. They cannot fail to entertain and instruct.”—_Critic._

    “One of the most amusing and instructive books Miss Pardoe has
    ever given to the public.”—_Messenger._

    “In this lively and agreeable book Miss Pardoe gives a fair
    picture of the society of the times, which has never been
    treated in a more interesting and pleasant manner.”—_Chronicle._

=THE LIFE AND TIMES OF GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.= By MRS.
THOMSON, Author of “The Life of the Duchess of Marlborough,” “Memoirs of
Sir W. Raleigh,” &c. With Portrait. (_Just Ready._)

=THE LIVES OF PHILIP HOWARD, EARL OF ARUNDEL, AND OF ANNE DACRES, HIS
WIFE.= Edited from the Original MSS. By the DUKE OF NORFOLK, E.M. 1 vol.
antique.

    “These biographies will be read with Interest. They throw
    valuable light on the social habits and the prevalent feelings
    of the Elizabethan age.”—_Literary Gazette._

=MEMOIRS OF BERANGER. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.= ENGLISH COPYRIGHT EDITION.
Second Edition, with numerous Additional Anecdotes and Notes, hitherto
unpublished. 8vo. with Portrait.

    “This is the Copyright Translation of Beranger’s Biography.
    It appears in a handsome volume, and is worthy of all praise
    as an honest piece of work. In this account of his life, the
    Poet displays all the mingled gaiety and earnestness, the
    warm-hearted sincerity, inseparable from his character. He
    tells, with an exquisite simplicity, the story of his early
    years. His life, he says, is the fairest commentary on his
    songs, therefore he writes it. The charm of the narrative is
    altogether fresh. It includes a variety of _chansons_, now
    first printed, touching closely on the personal history of
    which they form a part, shrewd sayings, and, as the field of
    action in life widens, many sketches of contemporaries, and
    free judgments upon men and things. There is a full appendix
    to the Memoir, rich in letters hitherto unpublished, and in
    information which completes the story of Beranger’s life. The
    book should be read by all.”—_Examiner._

=THE BOOK OF ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD, AND DECORATIONS OF HONOUR OF ALL
NATIONS; COMPRISING AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF EACH ORDER, MILITARY, NAVAL
AND CIVIL=; with Lists of the Knights and Companions of each British
Order. EMBELLISHED WITH FIVE HUNDRED FAC-SIMILE COLOURED ILLUSTRATIONS OF
THE INSIGNIA OF THE VARIOUS ORDERS. Edited by SIR BERNARD BURKE, Ulster
King of Arms. 1 vol. royal 8vo., handsomely bound, with gilt edges, price
£2. 2s.

    “This valuable and attractive work may claim the merit of being
    the best of its kind. It is so comprehensive in its character,
    and so elegant in its style, that it far outstrips all
    competitors. A full historical account of the orders of every
    country is given, with lists of the Knights and Companions of
    each British Order. Among the most attractive features of the
    work are the illustrations. They are numerous and beautiful,
    highly coloured, and giving an exact representation of the
    different decorations. The origin of each Order, the rules
    and regulations, and the duties incumbent on its members,
    are all given at full length. The fact of the work being
    under the supervision of Sir Bernard Burke, and endorsed by
    his authority, gives it another recommendation to the public
    favour.”—_Sun._

    “This is, indeed, a splendid book. It is an uncommon
    combination of a library book of reference and a book for a
    boudoir, undoubtedly uniting beauty and utility. It gives
    a sketch of the foundation and history of all recognised
    decorations of honour, among all nations, arranged in
    alphabetical order. The fac-similes of the insignia are well
    drawn and coloured, and present a brilliant effect. Sir Bernard
    Burke has done his work well; and this book of the quintessence
    of the aristocracy will soon find its place in every library
    and drawing-room.”—_Globe._

=JOURNAL OF AN ENGLISH OFFICER IN INDIA.= By MAJOR NORTH, 60th Rifles,
Deputy Judge Advocate-General, and Aide-de-Camp to General Havelock. 1
vol. with portrait.

    “We must commend Major’s North’s ‘Journal’ to universal
    approbation. It is manly in tone, noble in expression, and full
    of feeling, alike honourable to the soldier and his gallant
    profession. When we state that the book tells of the progress
    of the lion-hearted Havelock’s little band which relieved
    Lucknow, and is the first faithful record of the deeds of arms
    performed by that phalanx of heroes, we have said enough to
    cause it to be read, we are convinced, by every person who
    can avail himself of the opportunity of learning what were
    the hardships of his countrymen, and how immense were the
    sacrifices they made to save the English besieged inhabitants
    from a repetition of the atrocities of Cawnpore. We have as yet
    seen no book connected with the Indian mutiny which has given
    us so much gratification as Major North’s Journal.”—_Messenger._

=EASTERN HOSPITALS AND ENGLISH NURSES=; The Narrative of Twelve Months’
Experience in the Hospitals of Koulali and Scutari. By A LADY VOLUNTEER.
Third and Cheaper Edition, 1 vol. post 8vo. with Illustrations, 6s. bound.

    “The story of the noble deeds done by Miss Nightingale and her
    devoted sisterhood will never be more effectively told than
    in the beautiful narrative contained in these volumes.”—_John
    Bull._

=PICTURES OF SPORTING LIFE AND CHARACTER.= By LORD WILLIAM LENNOX. 2
vols. with Illustrations. 21s.

    “This work may be characterised as a perfect synopsis of
    English sports in the 19th century. Were the whole of the
    books previously written on the subject destroyed. Lord
    William Lennox’s alone would preserve a lifelike picture of
    the sports and amusements of our age. The volumes will be read
    with intense enjoyment by multitudes, for their author is an
    accomplished _littérateur_, who has known how to vary his theme
    so skillfully and to intersperse it with so many anecdotes
    and personal recollections of England’s most distinguished
    men, that even those who are not themselves given to sport
    will be deeply interested in the light he throws upon English
    society.”—_Illustrated News of the World._

=THE COUNTESS OF BONNEVAL: HER LIFE AND LETTERS.= By LADY GEORGIANA
FULLERTON. 2 vols. 21s.

    “The whole work forms one of those touching stories which
    create a lasting impression.”—_Athenæum._

    “The life of the Count de Bonneval is a page in history, but
    it reads like a romance; that of the Countess, removed from
    war and politics, never oversteps the domestic sphere, yet is
    equally romantic and singular. An accomplished writer has taken
    up the threads of this modest life, and brought out her true
    character in a very interesting and animated memoir. The story
    of the Countess of Bonneval is related with that happy art and
    grace which so characterise the author.”—_U. S. Magazine._

=THE LIFE OF MARIE DE MEDICIS, QUEEN OF FRANCE=, CONSORT OF HENRY IV.,
AND REGENT UNDER LOUIS XIII. By MISS PARDOE. Second Edition. 3 vols. 8vo.
Portraits.

=MEMOIRS OF THE BARONESS D’OBERKIRCH=, ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE SECRET HISTORY
OF THE COURTS OF FRANCE, RUSSIA, AND GERMANY. WRITTEN BY HERSELF, and
Edited by Her Grandson, the COUNT DE MONTBRISON. 3 vols. post 8vo. 15s.

    “The Baroness d’Oberkirch being the intimate friend of the
    Empress of Russia, wife of Paul I., and the confidential
    companion of the Duchess of Bourbon, her facilities for
    obtaining information respecting the most private affairs of
    the principal Courts of Europe, render her Memoirs unrivalled
    as a book of interesting anecdotes of the royal, noble and
    other celebrated individuals who flourished on the continent
    during the latter part of the last century. The volumes form
    a valuable addition to the personal history of an important
    period. They deserve general popularity.”—_Daily News._

=MEMOIRS OF RACHEL.= 2 vols. with Portrait. 21s.

    “A book sure to attract public attention, and well meriting
    it.”—_Globe._

=SCOTTISH HEROES IN THE DAYS OF WALLACE AND BRUCE.= By the REV. A. LOW,
A.M. 2 vols. post.

=MEMOIRS AND CORRESPONDENCE OF MAJOR GENERAL SIR W. NOTT, G.C.B.=,
COMMANDER OF THE ARMY OF CANDAHAR, AND ENVOY AT THE COURT OF LUCKNOW. 2
vols. 8vo. with Portrait. 16s. bound.

=RULE AND MISRULE OF THE ENGLISH IN AMERICA.= By the Author of “SAM
SLICK.” 2 vols. post 8vo.

    “We conceive this work to be by far the most valuable and
    important Judge Haliburton has ever written. While teeming
    with interest, moral and historical, to the general reader, it
    equally constitutes a philosophical study for the politician
    and statesman. It will be found to let in a flood of light upon
    the actual origin, formation, and progress of the republic of
    the United States.”—_Naval and Military Gazette._

=RECOLLECTIONS OF WEST END LIFE; WITH SKETCHES OF SOCIETY IN PARIS,
INDIA, &c.= By MAJOR CHAMBRE, late 17th Lancers. 2 vols. with Portrait of
George IV.

    “We find in Major Chambre’s lively sketches a mass of
    amusing anecdotes relating to persons eminent in their day
    for their position, wit, and political reputation. All
    that relates to George IV. will be read with attention and
    interest.”—_Messenger._

=THE UPPER and LOWER AMOOR; A NARRATIVE OF TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE.= By
T. W. ATKINSON. Author of “ORIENTAL and WESTERN SIBERIA.” With Map and
numerous Illustrations. (_In the Press._)

=SIXTEEN YEARS OF AN ARTIST’S LIFE IN MOROCCO, SPAIN, AND THE CANARY
ISLANDS.= By MRS. ELIZABETH MURRAY. 2 vols. 8vo. with Coloured
Illustrations.

    “Mrs. Murray, wife, we believe, of the English Consul at
    Teneriffe, is one of the first of female English Water Colour
    Artists. She draws well, and her colour is bright, pure,
    transparent, and sparkling. Her book is like her painting,
    luminous, rich and fresh. We welcome it (as the public will
    also do) with sincere pleasure. It is a hearty book, written by
    a clever, quick-sighted, and thoughtful woman, who, slipping a
    steel pen on the end of her brush, thus doubly armed, uses one
    end as well as the other, being with both a bright colourer,
    and accurate describer of colours, outlines, sensations,
    landscapes and things. In a word, Mrs. Murray is a clever
    artist, who writes forcibly and agreeably.”—_Athenæum._

    “Mrs. Elizabeth Murray is known to the artistic world as the
    principal star of the Female Exhibition of Paintings. She left
    England as she tells us, at eighteen, with all the man who is
    successively Consul at Tangiers and Teneriffe. She has, in
    consequence, peculiar advantages for the observation of Moorish
    and Spanish society, and as she possesses great observation
    and wields the pen as cleverly as the pencil, she has produced
    a book not only of interest, but of importance. In every
    way, whether descriptive or anecdotal, the work claims to be
    placed amongst the very best works of travel in the English
    Language.”—_Chronicle._

=REVELATIONS OF PRISON LIFE=; WITH AN ENQUIRY INTO PRISON DISCIPLINE AND
SECONDARY PUNISHMENTS. By GEORGE LAVAL CHESTERTON, 25 Years Governor of
the House of Correction at Cold-Bath Fields. Third Edition, Revised. 1
vol.

    “Mr. Chesterton has had a rare experience of human frailty.
    He has lived with the felon, the forger, the _lorette_, the
    vagabond, the murderer; has looked into the darkest sepulchres
    of the heart, without finding reason to despair of mankind.
    In his belief the worst of men have still some of the angel
    left. Such a testimony from such a quarter is full of novelty
    us it is of interest. As a curious bit of human history these
    volumes are remarkable. They are very real, very simple;
    dramatic without exaggeration, philosophic without being
    dull.”—_Athenæum._

=THE OLD COURT SUBURB; OR, MEMORIALS OF KENSINGTON=; REGAL, CRITICAL, AND
ANECDOTICAL. By LEIGH HUNT. Second Edition. 2 vols. post 8vo.

    “A delightful book. It will be welcome to all readers, and
    most welcome to those who have a love for the best kinds of
    reading.”—_Examiner._

=MY EXILE.= BY ALEXANDER HERZEN. 2 vols.

    “Mr. Herzen’s narrative, ably and unaffectedly written, and
    undoubtedly authentic, is indeed superior in interest to
    nine-tenths of the existing works on Russia.”—_Athenæum._

=A PRACTICAL GUIDE IN OBTAINING PROBATES, ADMINISTRATIONS, &c.=, in
Her Majesty’s Court of Probate; with numerous Precedents. By EDWARD
WEATHERLY, of Doctor’s Commons. Dedicated, by permission, to the Right
Hon. Sir CRESSWELL CRESSWELL, Judge of the New Court of Probate. Cheaper
Edition. 12s.

    “A most valuable book. Its contents are very
    diversified—meeting almost every use.”—_Solicitor’s Journal._

=ORIENTAL AND WESTERN SIBERIA=; A NARRATIVE OF SEVEN YEARS’ EXPLORATIONS
AND ADVENTURES IN SIBERIA, MONGOLIA, THE KIRGHIS STEPPES, CHINESE
TARTARY, AND CENTRAL ASIA. By THOMAS WITLAM ATKINSON. In one large
volume, royal 8vo., Price £2. 2s., elegantly bound. Embellished with
upwards of 50 Illustrations, including numerous beautifully coloured
plates, from drawings by the Author, and a map.

    “By virtue alike of its text and its pictures, we place this
    book of travel in the first rank among those illustrated gift
    books now so much sought by the public. Mr. Atkinson’s book
    is most readable. The geographer finds in it notice of ground
    heretofore left undescribed, the ethnologist, geologist, and
    botanist, find notes and pictures, too, of which they know
    the value, the sportman’s taste is gratified by chronicles
    of sport, the lover of adventure will find a number of
    perils and escapes to hang over, and the lover of a frank
    good-humoured way of speech will find the book a pleasant one
    in every page. Seven years of wandering, thirty-nine thousand
    five hundred miles of moving to and fro in a wild and almost
    unknown country, should yield a book worth reading, and they
    do.”—_Examiner._

    “A book of travels which in value and sterling interest must
    take rank as a landmark in geographical literature. Its
    coloured illustrations and wood engravings are of a high order,
    and add a great charm to the narrative. Mr. Atkinson has
    travelled where it is believed no European has been before.
    He has seen nature in the wildest, sublimest, and also the
    most beautiful aspects the old world can present. These he
    has depicted by pen and pencil. He has done both well. Many a
    fireside will rejoice in the determination which converted the
    artist into an author. Mr. Atkinson is a thorough Englishman,
    brave and accomplished, a lover of adventure and sport of every
    kind. He knows enough of mineralogy, geology, and botany to
    impart a scientific interest to his descriptions and drawings;
    possessing a keen sense of humour, he tells many a racy story.
    The sportsman and the lover of adventure, whether by flood or
    field, will find ample stores in the stirring tales of his
    interesting travels.”—_Daily News._

    “An animated and intelligent narrative, appreciably enriching
    the literature of English travel. Mr. Atkinson’s sketches were
    made by express permission of the late Emperor of Russia.
    Perhaps no English artist was ever before admitted into this
    enchanted land of history, or provided with the talisman
    and amulet of a general passport; and well has Mr. Atkinson
    availed himself of the privilege. Our extracts will have served
    to illustrate the originality and variety of Mr. Atkinson’s
    observations and adventures during his protracted wanderings of
    nearly forty thousand miles. Mr. Atkinson’s pencil was never
    idle, and he has certainly brought home with him the forms,
    and colours, and other characteristics of a most extraordinary
    diversity of groups and scenes. As a sportsman Mr. Atkinson
    enjoyed a plenitude of excitement. His narrative is well stored
    with incidents of adventure. His ascent of the Blelouka is a
    chapter of the most vivid romance of travel, yet it is less
    attractive than his relations of wanderings across the Desert
    of Gobi and up the Tangnou Chaiu.”—_Athenæum._

    “We predict that Mr. Atkinson’s ‘Siberia’ will very often
    assume the shape of a Christmas Present or New Year’s Gift,
    as it possesses, in an eminent degree, four very precious
    and suitable qualities for that purpose,—namely, usefulness,
    elegance, instruction and novelty. It is a work of great value,
    not merely on account of its splendid illustrations, but for
    the amount it contains of authentic and highly interesting
    intelligence concerning regions which, in all probability, has
    never, previous to Mr. Atkinson’s explorations, been visited
    by an European. Mr. Atkinson’s adventures are told in a manly
    style. The valuable and interesting information the book
    contains, gathered at a vast expense, is lucidly arranged, and
    altogether the work is one that the author-artist may well be
    proud of, and with which those who study it cannot fail to be
    delighted.”—_John Bull._

    “To the geographer, the geologist, the ethnographer, the
    sportsman, and to those who read only for amusement,
    this will be an acceptable volume. Mr. Atkinson is not
    only an adventurous traveller, but a correct and amusing
    writer.”—_Literary Gazette._

=TRAVELS IN EASTERN AFRICA, WITH THE NARRATIVE OF A RESIDENCE IN
MOZAMBIQUE: 1856 to 1859.= By LYONS McLEOD, Esq. F.R.G.S., &c. Late
British Consul in Mozambique. 2 vols. With Map and Illustrations.

=A JOURNEY ON A PLANK FROM KIEV TO EAUX-BONNES.= By LADY CHARLOTTE PEPYS.
2 vols., with Illustrations. 21s. (_Just Ready_).

=LAKE NGAMI=; OR, EXPLORATIONS AND DISCOVERIES DURING FOUR YEARS’
WANDERINGS IN THE WILDS OF SOUTH-WESTERN AFRICA. By CHARLES JOHN
ANDERSSON. 1 vol. royal 8vo., with Map and upwards of 50 Illustrations,
representing Sporting Adventures, Subjects of Natural History, &c. Second
Edition.

    “This narrative of African explorations and discoveries
    is one of the most important geographical works that have
    lately appeared. It contains the account of two journeys
    made between the years 1850 and 1854, in the first of which
    the countries of the Damaras and the Ovambo, previously
    scarcely known in Europe, were explored; and in the second
    the newly-discovered Lake Ngami was reached by a route that
    had been deemed impracticable, but which proves to be the
    shortest and the best. The work contains much scientific
    and accurate information as to the geology, the scenery,
    products, and resources of the regions explored, with notices
    of the religion, manners, and customs of the native tribes.
    The continual sporting adventures, and other remarkable
    occurrences, intermingled with the narrative of travel, make
    the book as interesting to read as a romance, as, indeed, a
    good book of travels ought always to be. The illustrations
    by Wolf are admirably designed, and most of them represent
    scenes as striking as any witnessed by Jules Gérard or Gordon
    Cumming.”—_Literary Gazette._

=THE OXONIAN IN THELEMARKEN=; OR, NOTES OF TRAVEL IN SOUTH-WESTERN
NORWAY, WITH GLANCES AT THE LEGENDARY LORE OF THAT DISTRICT. By the Rev.
F. METCALFE M.A., Fellow of Lincoln College. 2 vols. with illustrations.

    “This new book is as lively as its predecessor, its matter is
    as good, or better. The intermixture of legends and traditions
    with the notes of travel adds to the real value of the work,
    and strengthens its claim on a public that desires to be
    amused.”—_Examiner._

=THE OXONIAN IN NORWAY=; OR, NOTES OF EXCURSIONS IN THAT COUNTRY. By
the Rev. F. METCALFE, M.A., Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford. New and
Cheaper Edition, revised, 1 vol. post 8vo., with Map and additional
Illustrations.

    “Mr. Metcalfe’s book is as full of facts and interesting
    information as it can hold, and is interlarded with racy
    anecdotes. Some of these are highly original and entertaining.
    More than this, it is a truly valuable work, containing a fund
    of information on the statistics, politics, and religion of the
    countries visited.”—_Blackwood’s Magazine._

=SIX YEARS IN RUSSIA.= BY AN ENGLISH LADY. 2 vols. post 8vo. with
Illustrations. 21s. bound.

=A SUMMER AND WINTER IN THE TWO SICILIES.= By JULIA KAVANAGH, Author of
“Nathalie,” “Adèle,” &c. 2 vols. post 8vo. with illustrations, 21s. bound.

    “Miss Kavanagh is a woman of genius and imagination. She has
    a graceful and brilliant pen, much observation of character,
    and a keen eye for the aspects of nature. Her volumes contain
    much that is new. They are among the pleasantest volumes of
    travel we have lately met with, and we can cordially recommend
    them. Readers will find in these volumes the glow and colour
    of Italian skies, the rich and passionate beauty of Italian
    scenery, and the fresh simplicity of Southern life touched by
    the hand of an artist, and described by the perceptions of a
    warm-hearted and sympathizing woman.”—_The Press._

=THE JEWS IN THE EAST.= BY THE REV. P. BEATON, M.A. From the German of
DR. FRANKL. 2 vols. 21s.

    “Those persons who are curious in matters connected with
    Jerusalem and its inhabitants, are strongly recommended to read
    this work, which contains more information than is to be found
    in a dozen of the usual books of travel.”—_Times._

    “This book will richly reward perusal. We cordially recommend
    the narrative for solid information given from an unusual
    point of view, for power of description, for incident, and for
    details of manners, domestic habits, traditions, &c.,”—_Globe._

    “A very interesting work, one of the most original books of
    modern travel, that we have encountered for a long time.”—_John
    Bull._

=CHOW-CHOW; BEING SELECTIONS FROM A JOURNAL KEPT IN INDIA, &c.= By
the VISCOUNTESS FALKLAND. New and Revised Edition, 2 vols. 8vo., with
Illustrations. 21s.

    “Lady Falkland’s work may be read with interest and pleasure,
    and the reader will rise from the perusal instructed as well as
    amused.”—_Athenæum._

=A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE NORTH-WEST PASSAGE=
with Numerous Incidents of Travel and Adventure during nearly Five
Years’ Continuous Service in the Arctic Regions while in Search of the
Expedition under Sir John Franklin. By ALEX. ARMSTRONG, M.D., R.N., late
Surgeon and Naturalist of H.M.S ‘Investigator.’ 1 vol. With Map and
Plate, 16s.

    “This book is sure to take a prominent position in every
    library in which works of discovery and adventure are to be met
    with.”—_Daily News._

=THE WANDERER IN ARABIA.= BY G. T. LOWTH, ESQ. 2 vols. post 8vo. with
Illustrations. 12s.

    “Mr. Lowth has shown himself in these volumes to be an
    intelligent traveller, a keen observer of nature, and an
    accomplished artist.”—_Post._

=SPORTING ADVENTURES IN THE NEW WORLD=; OR, DAYS AND NIGHTS OF MOOSE
HUNTING IN THE PINE FORESTS OF ACADIA. By CAMPBELL HARDY, ROYAL
ARTILLERY. 2 vols. post 8vo. with illustrations. 12s.

    “A spirited record of sporting adventures, very entertaining
    and well worthy the attention of all sportsmen who desire some
    fresher field than Europe can afford them.”—_Press._

=A PILGRIMAGE INTO DAUPHINE=; WITH A VISIT TO THE MONASTERY OF THE
GRANDE CHARTREUSE, AND ANECDOTES, INCIDENTS, AND SKETCHES FROM TWENTY
DEPARTMENTS OF FRANCE. By the REV. G. M. MUSGRAVE, A.M. 2 vols. with
Illustrations.

=FAMILY ROMANCE=; OR, DOMESTIC ANNALS OF THE ARISTOCRACY. BY SIR BERNARD
BURKE, ULSTER KING OF ARMS. 2 vols. post 8vo. 21s.

Among the many other interesting legends and romantic family histories
comprised in these volumes, will be found the following:—The wonderful
narrative of Maria Stella, Lady Newborough, who claimed on such strong
evidence to be a Princess of the House of Orleans, and disputed the
identity of Louis Philippe—The story of the humble marriage of the
beautiful Countess of Strathmore, and the sufferings and fate of her
only child—The Leaders of Fashion, from Gramont to D’Orsay—The rise
of the celebrated Baron Ward, now Prime Minister at Parma—The curious
claim to the Earldom of Crawford—The Strange Vicissitudes of our Great
Families, replete with the most romantic details—The story of the
Kirkpatricks of Closeburn (the ancestors of the French Empress), and the
remarkable tradition associated with, them—The Legend of the Lambtons—The
verification in our own time of the famous prediction as to the Earls of
Mar—Lady Ogilvy’s escape—The Beresford and Wynyard ghost stories, &c.

    “It were impossible to praise too highly as a work of amusement
    these two most interesting volumes, whether we should have
    regard to its excellent plan or its not less excellent
    execution. The volumes are just what ought to be found on every
    drawing-room table. Here you have nearly fifty captivating
    romances with the pith of all their interest preserved in
    undiminished poignancy, and any one may be read in half an
    hour. It is not the least of their merits that the romances are
    founded on fact—or what, at least, has been handed down for
    truth by long tradition—and the romance of reality far exceeds
    the romance of fiction. Each story is told in the clear,
    unaffected style with which the author’s former works have made
    the public familiar.”—_Standard._

=THE ROMANCE OF THE FORUM=; OR, NARRATIVES, SCENES, AND ANECDOTES FROM
COURTS OF JUSTICE. SECOND SERIES. BY PETER BURKE, ESQ., of the Inner
Temple Barrister-at-Law. 2 vols. post 8vo. 12s.

    PRINCIPAL CONTENTS:—Lord Crichton’s Revenge—The Great Douglas
    Cause—Lord and Lady Kinnaird—Marie Delorme and Her Husband—The
    Spectral Treasure—Murders in Inns of Court—Matthieson
    the Forger—Trials that established the Illegality of
    Slavery—The Lover Highwayman—The Accusing Spirit—The
    Attorney-General of the Reign of Terror—Eccentric Occurrences
    in the Law—Adventuresses of Pretended Rank—The Courier of
    Lyons—General Sarrazin’s Bigamy—The Elstree Murder—Count
    Bocarmé and his wife—Professor Webster, &c.

    “The favour with which the first series of this publication
    was received, has induced Mr. Burke to extend his researches,
    which he has done with great judgment. The incidents forming
    the subject of the second series are as extraordinary in every
    respect, as those which obtained so high a meed of celebrity
    for the first.”—_Messenger._

=THE MAN OF THE PEOPLE.= BY WILLIAM HOWITT. 3 vols. post 8vo. (_Just
Ready_).

=SONGS OF THE CAVALIERS AND ROUNDHEADS, JACOBITE BALLADS, &c.= By G. W.
THORNBURY. 1 vol. with numerous Illustrations by H. S. MARKS. Elegantly
bound. 6s.

    “Mr. Thornbury has produced a volume of songs and ballads
    worthy to rank with Macaulay’s or Aytoun’s Lays.”—_Chronicle._
    “Those who love picture, life, and costume in song will here
    find what they love.”—_Athenæum._

=POEMS.= BY THE AUTHOR OF “JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN,” “A WOMAN’S THOUGHTS
ABOUT WOMEN,” &c. 1 vol. with Illustrations by BIRKET FOSTER. 10s. 6d.
bound.

    “A volume of poems which will assuredly take its place with
    those of Goldsmith, Gray, and Cowper, on the favourite shelf of
    every Englishman’s library. We discover in these poems till the
    firmness, vigour, and delicacy of touch which characterise the
    author’s prose works, and in addition, an ineffable tenderness
    and grace, such as we find in few poetical compositions besides
    those of Tennyson.”—_Illustrated News of the World._

    “We are well pleased with these poems by our popular novelist.
    They are the expression of genuine thoughts, feelings, and
    aspirations, and the expression is almost always graceful,
    musical and well-coloured. A high, pure tone of morality
    pervades each set of verses, and each strikes the reader as
    inspired by some real event, or condition of mind, and not by
    some idle fancy or fleeting sentiment.”—_Spectator._

=A LIFE FOR A LIFE.= BY THE AUTHOR OF “JOHN HALIFAX GENTLEMAN,” &c.

    “In ‘A Life for a Life’ the author is fortunate in a good
    subject, and she has produced a work of strong effect. The
    reader, having read the book through for the story, will be
    apt (if he be of our persuasion) to return and read again
    many pages and passages with greater pleasure than on a first
    perusal. The whole book is replete with a graceful, tender
    delicacy; and, in addition to its other merits, it is written
    in good, careful English.”—_Athenæum._

    “This book is signally the best its author has yet produced.
    The interest is intense, and is everywhere admirably sustained.
    Incident abounds, and both dialogue and style are natural
    and flowing. Great delicacy in the development of character,
    and a subtle power of self-analysis are conspicuous in ‘A
    Life for a Life,’ while the purity of its religious views,
    and the elevation—the grandeur, indeed—of its dominating
    sentiments, render its influences in every sense healthy and
    invigorating.”—_The Press._

    “‘A Life for a Life’ is one of the best of the author’s works.
    We like it better than ‘John Halifax.’ It is a book we should
    like every member of every family in England to read.”—_Herald._

=REALITIES OF PARIS LIFE.= BY THE AUTHOR of “FLEMISH INTERIORS,” &c. 3
vols. with Illustrations. 31s. 6d.

    “‘Realities of Paris Life’ is a good addition to Paris books,
    and important as affording true and sober pictures of the Paris
    poor.”—_Athenæum._

    “There is much new matter pleasantly put together in
    these volumes. Their merit will commend itself to all
    readers.”—_Examiner._

=NOVELS AND NOVELISTS, FROM ELIZABETH TO VICTORIA.= By J. C. JEAFFRESON,
ESQ. 2 vols. with Portraits. 21s.

=THE RIDES AND REVERIES OF MR. ÆSOP SMITH.= By MARTIN F. TUPPER, D.C.L.,
F.R.S., Author of “Proverbial Philosophy,” “Stephen Langton,” &c., 1 vol.
post 8vo.

    “This work will do good service to Mr. Tupper’s literary
    reputation. It combines with lucidity and acuteness of
    judgment, freshness of fancy and elegance of sentiment. In
    its cheerful and instructive pages sound moral principles
    are forcibly inculcated, and everyday truths acquire an air
    novelty, and are rendered peculiarly attractive by being
    expressed in that epigrammatic language which so largely
    contributed to the popularity of the author’s former work,
    entitled ‘Proverbial Philosophy.’”—_Morning Post._

=A MOTHER’S TRIAL.= BY THE AUTHOR OF “THE DISCIPLINE OF LIFE,” “THE TWO
BROTHERS,” &c. 1 vol. with Illustrations, by BIRKET FOSTER. 7s. 6d. bound.

    “‘A Mother’s Trial,’ by Lady Emily Ponsonby, is a work we
    can recommend. It breathes purity and refinement in every
    page.”—_Leader._


WORKS OF FICTION.

=SEVEN YEARS.= By JULIA KAVANAGH, Author of “NATHALIE,” 3 vols.

    “Nothing can be better of its kind than Miss Kavanagh’s ‘Seven
    Years.’ The story never flags in interest, so lifelike are the
    characters that move in it, so natural the incidents, and so
    genuine the emotions they excite in persons who have taken fast
    bold on our sympathy.”—_Spectator._

=LUCY CROFTON.= By the Author of “MARGARET MAITLAND.” 1 vol.

    “This is a charming novel. The characters are excellent; the
    plot is well defined and new; and the interest is kept up with
    an intensity which is seldom met with in these days. The author
    deserves our thanks for one of the most pleasant books of the
    season.”—_Herald._

=THE WOOD-RANGERS.= By CAPTAIN MAYNE REID. From the French of Louis de
Bellemare. 3 vols., with illustrations.

=THE LITTLE BEAUTY.= By MRS. GREY, Author of “THE GAMBLER’S WIFE.” 3 v.

=MR. AND MRS. ASHETON.= By the Author of “MARGARET AND HER BRIDESMAIDS.”
3 vols.

=THE WAY OF THE WORLD.= By ALISON REED. 3 vols.

    “There is a spell and fascination upon one from the first page
    to the last.”—_John Bull._

=ALMOST A HEROINE.= By the Author of “CHARLES AUCHESTER,” &c. 3 vols.

    “This novel is the author’s best.”—_Herald._

=WAIT AND HOPE.= By JOHN EDMUND READE. 3 vols.

    “‘Wait and Hope’ reminds us of the style of Godwin.”—_Athenæum._

=RAISED TO THE PEERAGE.= By MRS. OCTAVIUS OWEN. 3 vols.

    “‘Raised to the Peerage’ possesses very many of the requisites
    of a really good novel.”—_Examiner._

=FEMALE INFLUENCE.= By LADY CHARLOTTE PEPYS, 2 vols.

=LETHELIER.= By E. HENKAGE DERING, Esq. 2 vols.

=THE QUEEN OF HEARTS.= By WILKIE COLLINS. 3 vols.

    “‘The Queen of Hearts’ is such a fascinating creature that we
    cannot choose but follow her through the pages with something
    of a lover’s tenderness. As for the three old men, they are
    as good in their way as the Brothers Cheeryble of immortal
    memory.”—_Literary Gazette._

=STEPHAN LANGTON.= By MARTIN F. TUPPER, D.C.L. F.R.S. Author of
“PROVERBIAL PHILOSOPHY,” &c., 2 vols. with fine engravings.

    “These volumes are pre-eminently qualified to attract attention
    both from their peculiar style and their great ability. The
    author has long been celebrated for his attainments in literary
    creation, but the present work is incomparably superior to
    anything he has hitherto produced.”—_Sun._

=CREEDS.= By the Author of “THE MORALS OF MAY FAIR.” 3 vols.

    “This is a novel of strong dramatic situation, powerful plot,
    alluring and continuous interest, admirably defined characters,
    and much excellent remark upon human motives and social
    positions.”—_Literary Gazette._

=THE LEES OF BLENDON HALL.= By the Author of “ALICE WENTWORTH.”

    “A powerful and well-sustained story of strong
    interest.”—_Athenæum._

=NEWTON DOGVANE.= A Story of English Life. By FRANCIS FRANCIS. With
Illustrations by LEECH. 3 vols.

    “A capital sporting novel.”—_Chronicle._

=HELEN LINDSAY=; Or, THE TRIAL OF FAITH. By A CLERGYMAN’S DAUGHTER. 2
vols.

=WOODLEIGH.= By the Author of “WILDFLOWER,” “ONE AND TWENTY,” &c. 3 vols.

=BENTLEY PRIORY.= By MRS. HASTINGS PARKER. 3 vols.

    “An acquisition to novel-readers from its brilliant
    descriptions, sparkling style, and interesting story.”—_Sun._




NOW IN COURSE OF PUBLICATION.

HURST AND BLACKETT’S STANDARD LIBRARY OF CHEAP EDITIONS OF POPULAR MODERN
WORKS.

Each in a single volume, elegantly printed, bound, and illustrated, price
5s. A volume to appear every two months. The following are now ready.


VOL. I.—=SAM SLICK’S NATURE AND HUMAN NATURE.=

ILLUSTRATED BY LEECH.

“The first volume of Messrs. Hurst and Blackett’s Standard Library of
Cheap Editions of Popular Modern Works forms a very good beginning to
what will doubtless be a very successful undertaking. ‘Nature and Human
Nature’ is one of the best of Sam Slick’s witty and humorous productions,
and well entitled to the large circulation which it cannot fail to obtain
in its present convenient and cheap shape. The volume combines with the
great recommendations of a clear, bold type, and good paper, the lesser,
but still attractive merits, of being well illustrated and elegantly
bound.”—_Morning Post._

“This new and cheap edition of Sam Slick’s popular work will be an
acquisition to all lovers of wit and humour. Mr. Justice Haliburton’s
writings are so well known to the English public that no commendation
is needed. The volume is very handsomely bound and illustrated, and the
paper and type are excellent. It is in every way suited for a library
edition, and as the names of Messrs. Hurst and Blackett, warrant the
character of the works to be produced in their Standard Library, we have
no doubt the project will be eminently successful.”—_Sun._


VOL. II.—=JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.=

“This is a very good and a very interesting work. It is designed to trace
the career from boyhood to age of a perfect man—a Christian gentleman,
and it abounds in incident both well and highly wrought. Throughout it
is conceived in a high spirit, and written with great ability, better
than any former work, we think, of its deservedly successful author. This
cheap and handsome new edition is worthy to pass freely from hand to
hand, as a gift book in many households.”—_Examiner._

“The new and cheaper edition of this interesting work will doubtless meet
with great success. John Halifax, the hero of this most beautiful story,
is no ordinary hero, and this, his history, is no ordinary book. It is a
full-length portrait of a true gentleman, one of nature’s own nobility.
It is also the history of a home and a thoroughly English one. The work
abounds in incident, and many of the scenes are full of graphic power and
true pathos. It is a book that few will read without becoming wiser and
better.”—_Scotsman._


VOL. III.—=THE CRESCENT AND THE CROSS.=

BY ELIOT WARBURTON.

“Independent of its value as an original narrative, and its useful and
interesting information, this work is remarkable for the colouring
power and play of fancy with which its descriptions are enlivened.
Among its greatest and most lasting charms is its reverent and serious
spirit.”—_Quarterly Review._

“A book calculated to prove more practically useful was never penned than
‘The Crescent and the Cross’—a work which surpasses all others in its
homage for the sublime and its love for the beautiful in those famous
regions consecrated to everlasting immortality in the annals of the
prophets, and which no other writer has ever depicted with a pencil at
once so reverent and so picturesque.”—_Sun._


VOL. IV.—=NATHALIE. BY JULIA KAVANAGH.=

“‘Nathalie’ is Miss Kavanagh’s best imaginative effort. Its manner is
gracious and attractive. Its matter is good. A sentiment, a tenderness,
are commanded by her which are as individual as they are elegant. We
should not soon come to an end were we to specify all the delicate
touches and attractive pictures which place ‘Nathalie’ high among books
of its class.”—_Athenæum._

“A tale of untiring interest, full of deep touches of human nature. We
have no hesitation in predicting for this delightful tale a lasting
popularity, and a place in the foremost ranks of that most instructive
kind of fiction—the moral novel.”—_John Bull._

“A more judicious selection than ‘Nathalie’ could not have been made
for Messrs. Hurst and Blackett’s Standard Library. The series as it
advances realises our first impression, that it will be one of lasting
celebrity.”—_Literary Gazette._


VOL. V.—=A WOMAN’S THOUGHTS ABOUT WOMEN.=

BY THE AUTHOR OF “JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.”

“A book of sound counsel. It is one of the most sensible works of its
kind, well-written, true-hearted, and altogether practical. Whoever
wishes to give advice to a young lady may thank the author for means of
doing so.”—_Examiner._

“The author of ‘John Halifax’ will retain and extend her hold upon the
reading and reasonable public by the merits of her present work, which
bears the stamp of good sense and genial feeling.”—_Guardian._

“These thoughts are good and humane. They are thoughts we would wish
women to think.”—_Athenæum._

“This really valuable volume ought to be in every young woman’s hand. It
will teach her how to think and how to act. We are glad to see it in this
Standard Library.”—_Literary Gazette._


VOL. VI.—=ADAM GRAEME, OF MOSSGRAY.=

BY THE AUTHOR OF “MRS. MARGARET MAITLAND.”

“‘Adam Graeme’ is a story awakening genuine emotions of interest and
delight by its admirable pictures of Scottish life and scenery. The plot
is cleverly complicated, and there is great vitality in the dialogue,
and remarkable brilliancy in the descriptive passages, as who that has
read ‘Margaret Maitland’ would not be prepared to expect? But the story
has a ‘mightier magnet still,’ in the healthy tone which pervades it, in
its feminine delicacy of thought and diction, and in the truly womanly
tenderness of its sentiments. The eloquent author sets before us the
essential attributes of Christian virtue, their deep and silent workings
in the heart, and their beautiful manifestations in the life, with a
delicacy, a power, and a truth which can hardly be surpassed.”—_Morning
Post._

“‘Adam Graeme’ is full of eloquent writing and description. It is an
uncommon work, not only in the power of the style, in the interest of the
narrative, and in the delineation of character, but in the lessons it
teaches.”—_Sun._


VOL. VII.—=SAM SLICK’S WISE SAWS AND MODERN INSTANCES.=

“The best of all Judge Haliburton’s admirable works. It is one of
the pleasantest books we ever read, and we earnestly recommend
it.”—_Standard._

“The humour of Sam Slick is inexhaustible. He is ever and everywhere
a welcome visitor; smiles greet his approach, and wit and wisdom hang
upon his tongue. The present production is remarkable alike for its racy
humour, its sound philosophy, the felicity of its illustrations, and the
delicacy of its satire. We promise our readers a great treat from the
perusal of these ‘Wise Saws and Modern Instances,’ which contain a world
of practical wisdom, and a treasury of the richest fun.”—_Post._


VOL. VIII.—=CARDINAL WISEMAN’S RECOLLECTIONS OF THE LAST FOUR POPES.=

“There is no dynasty of European sovereigns about which we English
entertain so much vague curiosity, or have so little information, as
about the successors to the Popedom. Cardinal Wiseman is just the author
to meet this curiosity. His book is the lively record of what he has
himself seen, and what none but himself, perhaps, has had so good an
opportunity of thoroughly estimating. There is a gossipping, all-telling
style about the book which is certain to make it popular with English
readers.”—_John Bull._

“A picturesque book on Rome and its ecclesiastical sovereigns, by an
eloquent Roman Catholic. Cardinal Wiseman has here treated a special
subject with so much generality and geniality, that his recollections
will excite no ill-feeling in those who are most conscientiously
opposed to every idea of human infallibility represented in Papal
domination.”—_Athenæum._

“In the description of the scenes, the ceremonies, the ecclesiastical
society, the manners and habits of Sacerdotal Rome, this work is
unrivalled. It is full of anecdotes. We could fill columns with amusing
extracts.”—_Chronicle._



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74676 ***
